
[-- Image: graphics5 --][-- Image: graphics7 --][-- Image:
graphics6 --][-- Image: graphics8 --][-- Image: graphics10 --]

DELETE

THIS

PAGE

PART 7: TREASURE

“Your idea was good, Darion,” said Morningstar after we had
turned the sarcophagus lid halfway around. “You just got in a
bit of a hurry to try it.”

“Indeed,” I said, feeling foolish. I looked into the
sarcophagus; lying atop the mummified remains inside I saw a
sword, held in both bony hands with the point toward the
corpse's feet. The golden blade was untarnished; the huge ruby
set into the crossguard shone in the torchlight.

I didn't reach for it, though I found myself sorely tempted.
“Barthal,” I said, “tell me, is it safe to reach within?” The
Halfling climbed up onto the edge of the platform and leaned
over the sarcophagus, peering around within.

“I don't see a trap,” he remarked after careful study. “Do you
think the dead one, there, will rise up if you touch his sword?”

“He might,” answered Apoqulis, “but I doubt it. The skeletons
were likely the only guardians in this tomb.”

All eyes seemed to be on me. Reluctantly I reached within,
grasping the sword by the blade with my mailed glove so as to
avoid touching the corpse. The long-dead chieftain didn't want
to part with his weapon, but after a bit of twisting I worked
it loose.

Shaking bits of desiccated flesh from the hilt, I grasped the
weapon properly and held it aloft. It felt good in my hand… I
wondered what magic it might contain?

Barthal's voice shook me out of my contemplation. “Look here!”
he said, and I looked down. He had opened a secret panel in the
platform… and as I looked on, gold and silver coins began to
spill out. Barthal cried out gleefully, “Jackpot!”

Distribution of Treasure

Some adventurers choose to adventure to battle evil, while other
seek to attain glory or power… but others go in search of
treasure, gold and jewels and magical items. Below is the
information the Game Master will need to satisfy the greedy.

Random Treasure Generation

The tables below describe the various treasure types assigned to
monsters, as well as unguarded treasures appropriate to various
dungeon levels. To generate a random treasure, find the
indicated treasure type and read across; where a percentage
chance is given, roll percentile dice to see if that sort of
treasure is found. If so, roll the indicated dice to determine
how much.

Tables for the random generation of gems, jewelry (and bejeweled
art pieces), and magic items are provided after the main
treasure tables.

Placed Treasures

The Game Master is never required to roll for treasure; rather,
treasure may be placed, or random treasures amended, as desired
or needed for the purposes of the adventure. Special treasures
are always placed; for example, a special magic item needed to
complete an adventure would be placed.

Adjusting Treasure Awards

There will be many cases where random treasure generation is not
the best method to employ. For instance, a larger than average
treasure assigned to a smaller than average lair of monsters
might need to be reduced. It is up to the Game Master to decide
how much treasure he or she wishes to allow into the campaign.
Too much gold (or other treasure which can be converted to
gold) may make things too easy for the player characters.
Similarly, too many magic items may also make things too easy.

If you are a novice Game Master, remember that you can always
give more treasure, but it can be difficult to drain treasure
from the party without angering the players… particularly if
you use heavy-handed methods. Start small, and work up as you
gain experience.

Treasure Types

Lair Treasures

Type

100's of

Copper

100's of

Silver

100's of

Electrum

100's of

Gold

100's of

Platinum

Gems and

Jewelry

Magic Items

A

50% 5d6

60% 5d6

40% 5d4

70% 10d6

50% 1d10

50% 6d6

50% 6d6

30%  any 3

B

75% 5d10

50% 5d6

50% 5d4

50% 3d6

None

25% 1d6

25% 1d6

10%  1 weapon or armor

C

60% 6d6

60% 5d4

30% 2d6

None

None

25% 1d4

25% 1d4

15%  any 1d2

D

30% 4d6

45% 6d6

None

90% 5d8

None

30% 1d8

30% 1d8

20%  any 1d2

+ 1 potion

E

30% 2d8

60% 6d10

50% 3d8

50% 4d10

None

10% 1d10

10% 1d10

30%  any 1d4

+ 1 scroll

F

None

40% 3d8

50% 4d8

85% 6d10

70% 2d8

20% 2d12

10% 1d12

35%  any 1d4 except weapons

+ 1 potion

+ 1 scroll

G

None

None

None

90% 4d6x10

75% 5d8

25% 3d6

25% 1d10

50%  any 1d4

+ 1 scroll

H

75% 8d10

75% 6d10x10

75% 3d10x10

75% 5d8x10

75% 9d8

50% 1d100

50% 10d4

20%  any 1d4

+ 1 potion

+ 1 scroll

I

None

None

None

None

80% 3d10

50% 2d6

50% 2d6

15%  any 1

J

45% 3d8

45% 1d8

None

None

None

None

None

None

K

None

90% 2d10

35% 1d8

None

None

None

None

None

L

None

None

None

None

None

50% 1d4

None

None

M

None

None

None

90% 4d10

90% 2d8x10

55% 5d4

45% 2d6

None

N

None

None

None

None

None

None

None

40%  2d4 potions

O

None

None

None

None

None

None

None

50%  1d4 scrolls

Individual Treasures

Type

Pieces of

Copper

Pieces of

Silver

Pieces of

Electrum

Pieces of

Gold

Pieces of

Platinum

Gems and

Jewelry

Magic Items

P

3d8

None

None

None

None

None

None

None

Q

None

3d6

None

None

None

None

None

None

R

None

None

2d6

None

None

None

None

None

S

None

None

None

2d4

None

None

None

None

T

None

None

None

None

1d6

None

None

None

U

50% 1d20

50% 1d20

None

25% 1d20

None

5% 1d4

5% 1d4

2%  Any 1

V

None

25% 1d20

25% 1d20

50% 1d20

25% 1d20

10% 1d4

10% 1d4

5%  Any 1

Unguarded Treasures

Level

100's of

Copper

100's of

Silver

100's of

Electrum

100's of

Gold

100's of

Platinum

Gems and

Jewelry

Magic Items

1

75%  1d8

50%  1d6

25%  1d4

7%  1d4

1%  1d4

7%  1d4

3%  1d4

2%  Any 1

2

50%  1d10

50%  1d8

25%  1d6

20%  1d6

2%  1d4

10%  1d6

7%  1d4

5%  Any 1

3

30%  2d6

50%  1d10

25%  1d8

50%  1d6

4%  1d4

15%  1d6

7%  1d6

8%  Any 1

4-5

20%  3d6

50%  2d6

25%  1d10

50%  2d6

8%  1d4

20%  1d8

10%  1d6

12%  Any 1

6-7

15%  4d6

50%  3d6

25%  1d12

70%  2d8

15%  1d4

30%  1d8

15%  1d6

16%  Any 1

8+

10%  5d6

50%  5d6

25%  2d8

75%  4d6

30%  1d4

40%  1d8

30%  1d8

20%  Any 1

Note: Unguarded treasures should be rare; see the Game Master
section, below, for advice on placement of unguarded treasure.

Gems and Jewelry

Use the tables below to determine the base value and number
found when gems are indicated in a treasure hoard. If the
number generated in the main table above is small, roll for
each gem; but if the number is large (10 or more, at the GM's
option), after each roll for Type and Base Value, roll the
indicated die to see how many such gems are in the hoard.

d%

Type

Base Value

in Gold Pieces

Number

Found

01-20

Ornamental

10

1d10

21-45

Semiprecious

50

1d8

46-75

Fancy

100

1d6

76-95

Precious

500

1d4

96-00

Gem

1000

1d2

Jewel

5000

1

The values of gems vary from the above for reasons of quality,
size, etc. The GM may use the table below to adjust the values
of the gems in the hoard, at his or her option. This is why
there is no die result given in the table above for Jewel; on a
roll of 12 on the table below, a Gem can become a Jewel.

2d6

Value Adjustment

2

Next Lower Value Row

3

1/2

4

3/4

5-9

Normal Value

10

1.5 Times

11

2 Times

12

Next Higher Value Row

d%

Gem Type

d%

Gem Type

01-10

Greenstone

66-70

Topaz

11-20

Malachite

71-75

Bloodstone

21-28

Adventurine

76-79

Sapphire

29-38

Phenalope

80-89

Diamond

39-45

Amethyst

90-94

Fire Opal

46-54

Flurospar

95-97

Ruby

55-60

Garnet

98-00

Emerald

61-65

Alexandrite

Standard items of jewelry are valued at 2d8x100 gp value. The
table below can be used to generate descriptions of the items
themselves.

d%

Type

d%

Type

01-06

Anklet

56-62

Earring

07-12

Belt

63-65

Flagon

13-14

Bowl

66-68

Goblet

15-21

Bracelet

69-73

Knife

22-27

Brooch

74-77

Letter Opener

28-32

Buckle

78-80

Locket

33-37

Chain

81-82

Medal

38-40

Choker

83-89

Necklace

41-42

Circlet

90

Plate

43-47

Clasp

91-95

Pin

48-51

Comb

96

Sceptre

52

Crown

97-99

Statuette

53-55

Cup

00

Tiara

Magic Item Generation

Determine the sort of item found by rolling on the following
table:

Any

Weapon or Armor

Any Exc. Weapons

Type of Item

01-25

01-70

Weapon

26-35

71-00

01-12

Armor

36-55

13-40

Potion

56-85

41-79

Scroll

86-90

80-86

Ring

91-95

87-93

Wand, Staff, or Rod

96-00

94-00

Miscellaneous Magic

Magic Weapons

First, roll d% on the following table to determine the weapon
type:

d%

Weapon Type

01-02

Great Axe

03-09

Battle Axe

10-11

Hand Axe

12-19

Shortbow

20-27

Shortbow Arrow

28-31

Longbow

32-35

Longbow Arrow

36-43

Light Quarrel

44-47

Heavy Quarrel

48-59

Dagger

60-65

Shortsword

66-79

Longsword

80-81

Scimitar

82-83

Two-Handed Sword

84-86

Warhammer

87-94

Mace

95

Maul

96

Pole Arm

97

Sling Bullet

98-00

Spear

Next, roll on the Weapon Bonus tables. Follow the directions
given if a roll on the Special Enemy or Special Ability tables
are indicated; generally multiple rolls on the Special Ability
table should be ignored when rolled.

d% Roll

Weapon Bonus

Melee

Missile

Bonus

01-40

01-46

+1

41-50

47-58

+2

51-55

59-64

+3

56-57

+4

58

+5

59-75

65-82

+1, +2 vs. Special Enemy

76-85

83-94

+1, +3 vs. Special Enemy

86-95

Roll Again + Special Ability

96-98

95-98

Cursed, -1*

99-00

99-00

Cursed, -2*

* If cursed weapons are rolled along with special abilities,
ignore the special ability roll.

1d6

Special Enemy

1d6

Special Enemy

1

Dragons

4

Regenerators

2

Enchanted

5

Spell Users

3

Lycanthropes

6

Undead

1d20

Special Ability

01-09

Casts Light on Command

10-11

Charm Person

12

Drains Energy

13-16

Flames on Command

17-19

Locate Objects

20

Wishes

Magic Armor

Generate the type and bonus of each item of magic armor on the
tables below.

d%

Armor Type

d%

Armor Bonus

01-09

Leather Armor

01-50

+1

10-28

Chain Mail

51-80

+2

29-43

Plate Mail

81-90

+3

44-00

Shield

91-95

Cursed *

96-00

Cursed, AC 11 **

* If Cursed armor is rolled, roll again and reverse the bonus
(e.g., -1 instead of +1).

** This armor has AC 11 but appears to be +1 when tested.

Potions

d%

Type

d%

Type

d%

Type

01-03

Clairaudience

33-35

Diminution

69-72

Invisibility

04-07

Clairvoyance

36-39

ESP

73-76

Invulnerability

08-10

Control Animal

40-43

Fire Resistance

77-80

Levitation

11-13

Control Dragon

44-47

Flying

81-84

Longevity

14-16

Control Giant

48-51

Gaseous Form

85-86

Poison

17-19

Control Human

52-55

Giant Strength

87-89

Polymorph Self

20-22

Control Plant

56-59

Growth

90-97

Speed

23-25

Control Undead

60-63

Healing

98-00

Treasure Finding

26-32

Delusion

64-68

Heroism

Scrolls

d%

General Type

01-03

Cleric Spell Scroll (1 Spell)

04-06

Cleric Spell Scroll (2 Spells)

07-08

Cleric Spell Scroll (3 Spells)

09

Cleric Spell Scroll (4 Spells)

10-15

Magic-User Spell Scroll (1 Spell)

16-20

Magic-User Spell Scroll (2 Spells)

21-25

Magic-User Spell Scroll (3 Spells)

26-29

Magic-User Spell Scroll (4 Spells)

30-32

Magic-User Spell Scroll (5 Spells)

33-34

Magic-User Spell Scroll (6 Spells)

35

Magic-User Spell Scroll (7 Spells)

36-40

Cursed Scroll

41-46

Protection from Elementals

47-56

Protection from Lycanthropes

57-61

Protection from Magic

62-75

Protection from Undead

76-85

Map to Treasure Type A

86-89

Map to Treasure Type E

90-92

Map to Treasure Type G

93-00

Map to 1d4 Magic Items

Rings

d%

Type

01-06

Control Animal

07-12

Control Human

13-19

Control Plant

20-30

Delusion

31-33

Djinni Summoning

34-44

Fire Resistance

45-57

Invisibility

58-66

Protection +1

67-70

Protection +2

71

Protection +3

72-73

Regeneration

74-75

Spell Storing

76-81

Spell Turning

82-83

Telekinesis

84-90

Water Walking

91-97

Weakness

98

Wishes

99-00

X-Ray Vision

[-- Image: graphics12 --]

Wands, Staves and Rods

d%

Type

01-08

Rod of Cancellation

09-13

Snake Staff

14-17

Staff of Commanding

18-28

Staff of Healing

29-30

Staff of Power

31-34

Staff of Striking

35

Staff of Wizardry

36-40

Wand of Cold

41-45

Wand of Enemy Detection

46-50

Wand of Fear

51-55

Wand of Fireballs

56-60

Wand of Illusion

61-65

Wand of Lightning Bolts

66-73

Wand of Magic Detection

74-79

Wand of Paralyzation

80-84

Wand of Polymorph

85-92

Wand of Secret Door Detection

93-00

Wand of Trap Detection

[-- Image: graphics4 --]

Miscellaneous Magic Items

d%

Type

01-04

Amulet of Proof against Detection and Location

05-06

Bag of Devouring

07-12

Bag of Holding

13-17

Boots of Levitation

18-22

Boots of Speed

23-27

Boots of Traveling and Leaping

28

Bowl Commanding Water Elementals

29

Brazier Commanding Fire Elementals

30-35

Broom of Flying

36

Censer Commanding Air Elementals

37-39

Cloak of Displacement

40-43

Crystal Ball

44-45

Crystal Ball with Clairaudience

46

Drums of Panic

47

Efreeti Bottle

48-54

Elven Boots

55-61

Elven Cloak

62-63

Flying Carpet

64-70

Gauntlets of Ogre Power

71-72

Girdle of Giant Strength

73-78

Helm of Reading Languages and Magic

79

Helm of Telepathy

80

Helm of Teleportation

81

Horn of Blasting

82-90

Medallion of ESP

91

Mirror of Life Trapping

92-96

Rope of Climbing

97-99

Scarab of Protection

00

Stone Commanding Earth Elementals

Explanation of Magic Items

Using Magic Items

To use a magic item, it must be activated, although sometimes
activation simply means putting a ring on your finger. Some
items, once donned, function constantly.

Some items are activated just by using them. For instance, a
character has to drink a potion, swing a sword, interpose a
shield to deflect a blow in combat, wear a ring, or don a
cloak. Activation of these items is generally straightforward
and self-explanatory. This doesn’t mean that if you use such an
item, you automatically know what it can do. You must know (or
at least guess) what the item can do and then use the item in
order to activate it, unless the benefit of the item comes
automatically, such as from drinking a potion or swinging a
sword.

If no activation method is suggested either in the magic item
description or by the nature of the item, assume that a command
word is needed to activate it. Command word activation means
that a character speaks the word and the item activates. No
other special knowledge is needed.

A command word can be a real word, but when this is the case,
the holder of the item runs the risk of activating the item
accidentally by speaking the word in normal conversation. More
often, the command word is some seemingly nonsensical word, or
a word or phrase from an ancient language no longer in common
use. Note that many magic items must be held in the hand (or
otherwise specially handled or worn) to be used; the risk of
accidental activation is less significant for such items.

Learning the command word for an item may be easy (sometimes the
word is actually inscribed on the item) or it may be difficult,
requiring the services of a powerful wizard or sage, or some
other means of discovery.

Only the character holding or wearing a magic item may activate
it. A character that has been gagged or silenced may not
activate a magic item which requires a command word.

When an article of magic armor, clothing or jewelry (including a
ring) is discovered, size is not usually an issue. Such items
magically adjust themselves for wearers from as small as
Halflings to as large as Humans. This effect is called
accommodation. The GM may create “primitive” items lacking this
power if he or she wishes.

Generally only one magical item of a given type may be worn at
the same time. For example, a character can normally only wear
one suit of armor, wear one necklace and carry one shield at a
time. In the case of rings, a character may wear one magical
ring per hand. If a character wears more items of a given type
than would normally be practical, the items will usually fail
to function due to interference with one another; for instance,
wearing two rings on the same hand normally results in both
rings failing to operate. Note, however, that this limitation
can not be used to disable cursed magic items. For example,
wearing a cursed ring would prevent another magic ring from
being worn and used on that hand, but the curse would not be
lifted by donning a second magic ring.

Magic Weapons

Magic weapons are created with a variety of powers and will
usually aid the wielder in combat. A magical weapon's bonus is
applied to all attack and damage rolls made with the weapon.

Casts Light on Command: By drawing the weapon and uttering a
command word, the wielder may cause it to glow; it will then
shed light with the same radius as a light spell. Sheathing or
laying down the weapon, or speaking the command word again,
dispels the effect. This power may be used as often as desired.

Charm Person: This power allows the wielder to cast charm person
once per day, as if by an 8th level Magic-User, by brandishing
the weapon, speaking a command word and gazing at the target
creature. (The wielder's gaze does not have to be met for the
spell to be cast.) The target creature is allowed saving throws
just as described in the spell description.

Drains Energy: A weapon with this power drains one life energy
level on a hit, as described under Energy Drain in the
Encounter section; up to 2d4 levels can be drained by a weapon
with this power, after which time the weapon loses this power
but retains any other magical effects or bonuses.

Flames on Command: Upon command, the weapon will be sheathed in
fire. The fire does not harm the wielder. The effect remains
until the command is given again, or until the weapon is
dropped or sheathed. While it flames, all damage done by the
weapon is treated as fire damage, and an additional +1 bonus
(in addition to the weapon's normal bonus) is added to damage
when fighting trolls, treants, and other creatures especially
vulnerable to fire. It casts light and burns just as if it were
a torch.

Locate Objects: This power allows the wielder to cast the spell
locate object once per day, as if by an 8th level Magic-User.

Special Enemy: These weapons are created to combat a specific
sort of creature, as rolled on the Special Ability table. When
used against that specific enemy, the second listed bonus
applies instead of the first; so a sword +1, +3 vs. Undead
would provide +1 attack and damage against giant rats, but +3
attack and damage rolls against zombies.

Wishes: Weapons with this power have the ability to grant 1d4
wishes. The GM must adjudicate all wishes, and instructions are
given in the Game Master section regarding this. After these
wishes have been made, the weapon loses this power, but retains
any other bonuses and powers.

Cursed Weapons inflict a penalty to the wielder's attack rolls,
as rolled on the Weapon Bonus table. The curse causes the
afflicted character to be unable to get rid of the weapon.
There are two possible forms the curse may take: Obsession and
Affliction. The GM may decide which to use at his or her
option.

Obsession: Regardless of how severe the penalty is, the
character wielding the weapon will believe it is a bonus and
refuse to use any other weapon in combat. A remove curse spell
is the only way to rid a character of such a weapon; but as he
or she will believe the weapon is the best magical weapon ever,
the character receives a saving throw vs. Spells to resist.

Affliction: The character knows the weapon is cursed as soon as
he or she uses it in combat; however, any attempt to throw it
away fails, as the weapon magically appears back in the
character's hand whenever he or she tries to draw any other
weapon. In this case, the remove curse spell needed to rid the
character of the weapon will be unopposed (i.e. no saving
throw).

Magic Armor

Magic armor (including shields) offers improved, magical
protection to the wearer. In general, magic armor grants the
normal Armor Class for its type, plus the magical armor bonus,
as rolled on the Magic Armor table; for example, Plate Mail +2
provides an Armor Class of 19.

There are two varieties of cursed armor: Cursed Armor -1 and
Cursed Armor AC 11. The first variety's AC is reduced by the
rolled penalty; for example, Plate Mail -1 grants Armor Class
16. The second type is much worse, for regardless of the type,
it only provides Armor Class 11. Dexterity and shield bonuses
still apply.

Cursed armor cannot be removed from the wearer once the curse is
proven, that is, once the wearer is hit in combat. Once the
curse has taken effect, only a remove curse spell, or some more
powerful magic (such as a wish), will enable the wearer to
remove it. The armor will detect as magical, like any other
magic armor; the curse cannot be detected by any means other
than wearing the armor in combat.

Potions

A potion is an elixir concocted with a spell-like effect that
affects only the drinker. Unless otherwise noted, a potion
grants its benefits for 1d6+6 turns (even if the duration of an
associated spell is longer or shorter).

Clairaudience: This potion enables the drinker to hear sounds in
another area through the ears of a living creature in that area,
up to a maximum 60' away. This effect otherwise functions just
as the spell clairvoyance.

Clairvoyance: This potion grants the imbiber the effect of the
clairvoyance spell.

Control Animal: This potion functions like a control human
potion, but affects only normal, non-magical animals.

Control Dragon: This potion functions like a control human
potion, but affects only dragons.

Control Giant: This potion functions like a control human
potion, but affects only giants.

Control Human: This potion allows the drinker to charm a human,
demi-human, or humanoid by gazing at them. The effect functions
like the charm person spell. If the charm is resisted, the
drinker can attempt to charm up to two more targets before the
potion’s benefit is exhausted.

Control Plant: This potion grants the drinker control over one
or more plants or plant creatures within a 10' square area up
to 50' away. Normal plants become animated, having a movement
rate of 10', and obey the drinker's commands. If ordered to
attack, only the largest plants can do any real harm, attacking
with a +0 attack bonus and inflicting 1d4 points of damage per
hit. Affected plant creatures (who fail to save vs. Spells) can
understand the drinker, and behave as if under a charm monster
spell.

Control Undead: This potion grants the drinker command of 3d6
hit dice of undead monsters. A save vs. Spells is allowed to
resist the effect. Mindless undead follow the drinker's
commands exactly; free-willed undead act as if under a charm
person spell.

Delusion: This cursed potion will appear, if tested or analyzed,
to be one of the other potions (other than poison). When
imbibed, the drinker will briefly believe he has received the
benefits of the “other” potion, but the illusion will be
swiftly exposed…

Diminution: This potion reduces the drinker and all items worn
or carried to one-twelfth of his or her original height (so
that a 6' tall character becomes 6” tall). The drinker's weight
is divided by 1,728; this makes an armed warrior weigh less than
2.5 ounces. The affected creature cannot make an effective
attack against any creature bigger than a house cat, but may be
able to slip under doors or into cracks and has a 90% chance of
moving about undetected (both in terms of sound and vision).

ESP: This potion grants the power of the spell of the same name.

Fire Resistance: This potion grants the imbiber the power of the
spell resist fire.

Flying: This spell grants the power of the spell fly.

Gaseous Form: The drinker and all of his or her gear become
insubstantial, misty, and translucent. He or she becomes immune
to non-magical weapons, and has an Armor Class of 22 vs. magical
weapons. The imbiber can’t attack or cast spells while in
gaseous form. The drinker also loses supernatural abilities
while in gaseous form. A gaseous creature can fly at a speed of
10', and can pass through small holes or narrow openings, even
mere cracks, as long as the potion persists. The gaseous
creature is subject to the effects of wind, and can’t enter
water or other liquid. Objects cannot be manipulated in this
form, even those brought along when the potion was imbibed. The
drinker cannot resume material form at will, but must wait for
the potion to expire; however, the potion may be quaffed in
thirds, in which case each drink lasts 1d4+1 turns.

Giant Strength: This potion grants the imbiber the Strength of a
giant. For the duration, the drinker gains a bonus of +5 on
attack and damage rolls with melee or thrown weapons, and can
throw large stones just as a stone giant can.

Growth: The drinker of this potion (with all equipment worn or
carried) becomes twice normal height and eight times normal
weight. The enlarged character is treated as having the
Strength of a Stone Giant (but without the rock-throwing
ability), gaining +5 on attack and damage rolls.

Healing: The imbiber of this potion receives 1d6+1 hit points of
healing (as the spell cure light wounds).

Heroism: This potion improves the fighting ability of the
drinker. Fighters of less than 3rd level gain +3 to attack
bonus as well as gaining 3 hit dice. Fighters of 4th to 5th
level gain +2 to attack bonus and 2 hit dice. Fighters of 6th
or 7th level gain +1 to attack bonus and 1 hit die. Fighters of
8th level or higher, as well as non-Fighter class characters,
gain no hit dice, but still receive +1 to attack bonus. Hit
dice gained are only temporary, and damage received is deducted
from those hit dice first; any that remain when the potion
expires are simply lost.

Invisibility: This potion makes the imbiber invisible (as the
spell). This potion may be quaffed in thirds, in which case
each drink lasts 1d4+1 turns.

Invulnerability: This potion grants a bonus of +2 to Armor
Class.

Levitation: This potion grants the power of the spell levitate.

Longevity: The drinker of this potion becomes younger by 1d10
years.

Poison: This isn't a potion at all, it's a trap. The drinker
must save vs. Poison or die, even if only a sip was imbibed.

Polymorph Self: This potion grants the power of the spell of the
same name.

Speed: This potion gives the drinker the benefits of the spell
haste.

Treasure Finding: The imbiber of this potion will immediately
know the direction and approximate distance to the largest
treasure hoard in a 300' spherical radius. This potion
specifically detects platinum, gold, electrum, silver, and
copper; gemstones and magic items are not detected.

Scrolls

Most scrolls contain some sort of magic which is activated when
read, and which may only be used once; the characters burn away
as the words are read.

Spell Scrolls are enchanted with one or more Cleric or
Magic-User spells (never both sorts on the same scroll). Each
spell can be used just once, though of course the same spell
may appear multiple times on a single scroll. Use the table
below to determine the spell level of each spell on a scroll.
Only a Cleric can use a Clerical scroll, and only a Magic-User
can use a Magic-User scroll.

Magic-Users must cast read magic on a spell scroll before being
able to use it; each scroll needs to be treated in this way
just once, and the effect lasts indefinitely thereafter. If a
Magic-User attempts to cast a spell from a scroll, and he or
she does not know that spell, there is a 10% chance the spell
will fail. If a spell on a scroll is of higher level than the
highest level spell the Magic-User can cast, for each spell
level of difference, add 10% to the chance of failure. For
example, Aura the 3rd level Magic-User attempts to cast
polymorph self from a scroll. Aura is able to cast, at most,
2nd level spells. Polymorph self is a 4th level spell, so Aura
has a chance of failure of 10% (she doesn't know the spell)
plus 20% (2nd level maximum vs. 4th level spell), for a total
of 30%.

Clerical scrolls are written in a normal language (being just
specially enchanted prayers), so the Cleric merely needs to
know the language in which the scroll is written in order to
use it. Clerics suffer the same chance of failure as do
Magic-Users, save that the 10% penalty assigned for not knowing
the spell does not apply.

Spell Scrolls: Spell Level

d%

Level of Spell

01-30

1st

31-55

2nd

56-75

3rd

76-88

4th

89-97

5th

98-00

6th

A Cursed Scroll inflicts some curse upon whoever reads it. It
need not be read completely; in fact, merely glancing at the
text is enough to inflict the curse. A saving throw may or may
not be allowed, as determined by the GM (though a save vs.
Spells should usually be allowed). The GM is encouraged to be
creative when creating curses; the spell bestow curse (the
reverse of remove curse) can be used for inspiration, but
cursed scrolls can contain more powerful or inventive curses at
the GM's discretion.

Protection Scrolls can be read by any character class, assuming
the character can read the language the scroll is written in
(see the notes under Language in the Character section for
details). When read, a protection scroll creates a 10' radius
protective circle around the reader; preventing the warded
creatures from entering. The circle moves with the reader. Any
creature other than the sort the scroll wards may enter,
including of course the allies of the scroll-reader, who are
themselves protected so long as they remain entirely within the
circle. If any creature within the circle performs a melee
attack against any of the warded creatures, the circle is
broken and the warded creatures may freely attack. Normal
protection scrolls last for 2 turns after being read.

Protection from Magic scrolls are special, as they protect
against magic spells and items rather than creatures. No
magical effect can cross the 10' circle of protection in either
direction for 1d4 turns. As with the other protection scrolls,
the circle created by this scroll moves with the reader.

Treasure Maps are generally non-magical. They must be created by
the GM, although he or she may delay creating the map until the
characters can actually use it. The treasure indicated on the
map will normally be guarded by some sort of monster,
determined by the GM as desired.

Rings

A ring is a circular metal band worn on the finger (no more than
one ring per hand) that has a spell-like power (often a constant
effect that affects the wearer).

Control Animal: The wearer of this ring can charm up to 6 hit
dice of animals. The effect works much like a charm person
spell, but only affects animals (including giant-sized animals,
but excluding fantastic creatures as well as anything more
intelligent than a dog or cat). The wearer can activate the
power at will, targeting any animal within 60' that he or she
can see. The wearer may choose to end the effect for one or
more controlled creatures at any time, in order to “free”
enough hit dice to control a new target.

Control Human: The wearer of this ring may cast the spell charm
person at any target he or she can see within 60'. The wearer
can use this power once per round, at will, but cannot control
more than 6 hit dice of creatures at a time; however, the
wearer may choose to end the effect for one or more controlled
creatures at any time, in order to “free” enough hit dice to
control a new target.

Control Plant: The wearer of this ring may create an effect
equivalent to a potion of plant control at will, affecting
plants or plant creatures within 60' that he or she can see.
The effect lasts as long as the wearer remains within 60' of
the plants or plant creatures. A saving throw is allowed just
as for the potion.

Delusion: This ring appears to be some other sort of ring (roll
again on the rings table to determine what sort). Whoever wears
it believes it is working, and behaves thus (so a character who
believes he is wearing a ring of invisibility will believe
himself to actually be invisible). Unlike the potion of the
same name, the ring's effect is not dispelled by the wearer
taking damage; in fact, the only way to rid a character of this
cursed item is with the spell remove curse.

Djinni Summoning: This ring serves as a special gate by means of
which a specific djinni can be called from the Elemental Plane
of Air. When the ring is rubbed, the djinni appears on the next
round. The djinni faithfully obeys and serves the wearer of the
ring, but never for more than 1 hour per day. If the djinni of
the ring is ever killed, the ring becomes non-magical and
worthless.

Fire Resistance: The wearer of this ring receives protection as
the spell resist fire, but the protection works continually.

Invisibility: By activating this simple silver ring, the wearer
can benefit from invisibility, as the spell. If the
invisibility is dispelled (as described for the spell), the
ring may not be reactivated for one full turn. The invisibility
effect otherwise lasts for 24 hours.

Protection: This ring offers continual magical protection in the
form of a bonus to the Armor Class of the wearer (varying from
+1 to +3 as shown on the table). This bonus is also applied to
the wearer's saving throw die rolls.

Regeneration: This ring grants the wearer the power of
regeneration, exactly as described in the description of the
troll, including the weakness with respect to acid and fire
damage. However, only damage taken while wearing the ring is
regenerated.

Spell Storing: A ring of spell storing contains a number of
Magic-User spells that the wearer can cast. Each spell has a
caster level equal to the minimum level needed to cast that
spell. Any class may wear and use this ring, but it can only be
recharged by a Magic-User casting the appropriate spell into it.
A table is provided below to determine how many spells, and what
levels they are. A ring of spell storing must be recharged with
the same spells that were placed into it when it was made; so a
ring of two spell storing containing fireball and fly can only
be recharged with those two spells. The ring magically imparts
to the wearer the names of all spells stored within it. A ring
found in a treasure hoard may be completely charged, or
discharged, or partially charged, at the GM's option.

d%

# of Spells

d%

Level of Spell

01-24

1

01-30

1st

25-48

2

31-55

2nd

49-67

3

56-75

3rd

68-81

4

76-85

4th

82-91

5

86-97

5th

92-96

6

98-00

6th

97-00

7

Spell Turning: This ring reflects spells cast directly at the
wearer, but not area effect spells, back at the caster; so a
hold person spell would be reflected, but not a fireball. It
will reflect up to 2d6 spells before its power is exhausted.

Telekinesis: The wearer of this ring can use the power of the
spell telekinesis, as if cast by a 12th level Magic-User. The
effect may be used as many times per day as the wearer wishes,
but lasts only as long as the wearer concentrates on it.

Water Walking: This ring allows the wearer to walk on any liquid
as if it were firm ground. Mud, oil, snow, quicksand, running
water, ice, and even lava can be traversed easily, since the
wearer’s feet hover an inch or two above the surface. Molten
lava will still cause the wearer damage from the heat since he
or she is still near it. The wearer can walk, run, or otherwise
move across the surface as if it were normal ground.

Weakness: Whoever puts this ring on is cursed; his or her
Strength score is reduced immediately to 3. The ring can only
be removed with remove curse.

Wishes: A ring of wishes contains the power to grant wishes to
the wearer. 1d4 wishes will remain within the ring when it is
found. The GM must adjudicate all wishes, and instructions are
given in the Game Master section regarding this.

X-Ray Vision: On command, this ring gives its possessor the
ability to see into and through solid matter. Vision range is
20 feet, with the viewer seeing as if he were looking at
something in normal light even if there is no illumination.
X-ray vision can penetrate 1 foot of stone, 1 inch of common
metal, or up to 3 feet of wood or dirt. Thicker substances or a
thin sheet of lead or gold blocks the vision. The ring may be
used three times per day, and each use lasts at most one turn
(or until the wearer ceases to concentrate upon it).

Wands, Staves and Rods

A wand is a short stick, generally 12 to 18 inches long, imbued
with the power to cast a specific spell or spell-like effect. A
newly created wand has 20 charges, and each use of the wand
depletes one of those charges; a wand found in a treasure hoard
will have 2d10 charges remaining. If a wand generates an effect
equivalent to a spell, assume the spell functions as if cast by
a 6th level caster, or the lowest level caster who could cast
that spell (whichever is higher), unless otherwise noted. Wands
are generally usable only by Magic-Users. Saving throws are
rolled as normal, but on the Magic Wands column rather than the
Spells column.

A staff has a number of different (but often related) spell
effects. A newly created staff has 30 charges, and each use of
the staff depletes one or more of those charges. A staff found
in a treasure hoard will have 3d10 charges remaining. Spell
effects generated by a staff operate at 8th level, or the
lowest caster level the spell could be cast by, whichever is
higher, unless otherwise stated. Staves are usable only by
Magic-Users, except where noted. Saving throws against magic
from a staff are rolled on the Spells column.

A rod is a scepter-like item with a special power unlike that of
any known spell. Rods are normally usable by any class.

Rod of Cancellation: This dreaded rod is a bane to magic items,
for its touch drains an item of all magical properties. If the
item is held by a creature, an attack roll is needed to touch
it. Upon draining an item, the rod itself becomes brittle and
cannot be used again. Drained items are only restorable by a
wish.

Snake Staff: This item is a walking staff +1. When used by a
Cleric, the user may command the staff to transform into a
constrictor snake (instead of causing damage) on a successful
hit. The snake will wrap around a target up to man sized and
hold him or her fast for 1d4 turns, unless a save vs. Spells is
made. The snake does not attack in any other way, nor cause any
damage. The snake may be recalled by the user at any point, in
which case it returns to his or her hand and returns to staff
form. It also returns in this way when the duration expires, or
if the save is made. The snake has Armor Class 15, moves 20' per
round and has 20 hit points; any hit points of damage taken are
healed completely when the snake returns to staff form; if
killed in snake form, the magic is destroyed and it turns into
a broken stick. The staff may be used any number of times per
day, and neither has nor uses charges.

Staff of Commanding: This staff can cast charm person and charm
monster spells, and can grant a power equivalent to a potion of
plant control. Each function uses one charge.

Staff of Healing: This staff can heal 1d6+1 hit points per
charge expended, as the spell cure light wounds. Alternately,
with an expenditure of two charges, the staff can cast cure
disease. This staff is only usable by a Cleric.

Staff of Power: This is a very potent magic item, with offensive
and defensive abilities. It is usually topped with a glistening
gem, its shaft straight and smooth. It has the following powers
costing one charge per use: lightning bolt (6d6 damage),
fireball (6d6 damage), cone of cold (as the wand, for 6d6
damage), continual light, and telekinesis (as the ring, lasting
at most 1d6 turns). The staff is also a +2 walking staff, and
can be used exactly as a staff of striking. A staff of power
can be used for a retributive strike, requiring it to be broken
by its wielder. All charges currently in the staff are instantly
released in a 30' radius, doing 1d6 damage per charge remaining
(save vs. Spells for half damage). All within the area,
including the wielder, are affected by this.

After all charges are used up from the staff, it remains a +2
walking staff. Once empty of charges, it cannot be used for a
retributive strike.

Staff of Striking: This staff has no attack bonus, but is
treated as a +1 weapon with respect to what sorts of monsters
it can hit (and is usable by any class in that mode). This
staff's primary power may only be used if wielded by a Cleric:
By uttering a command word, the Cleric may create an effect
similar to the spell striking. Expenditure of one charge adds
1d6 damage to the weapon's next strike; expenditure of two
charges adds 2d6, and expenditure of three charges adds 3d6
damage. If the weapon is not successfully used after the
command word has been spoken, the effect dissipates after one
turn.

Staff of Wizardry: This staff is equivalent to the staff of
power, above, and has the following powers as well:
invisibility, passwall, web, and conjure elementals (as the
spell, but conjuring staff elementals as described in the
Monsters section). These powers each use one charge when
activated.

Wand of Cold: This wand generates a conical blast of cold doing
6d8 damage (save vs. Magic Wands for half damage). The cone
spreads from the tip of the wand to a width of 30' at a
distance of 40' away.

Wand of Enemy Detection: The effect of this wand is to make all
enemies of the user within 60' glow with a greenish white light
for one round. Even hidden or invisible enemies glow in this
way, revealing them, but enemies completely out of sight (such
as behind a wall) may not be seen by the user. An “enemy” is
any creature which is thinking of or otherwise intending to
harm the user; also, all undead monsters and animated
constructs within range will glow in this way regardless of
intent or thoughts (or lack thereof).

Wand of Fear: This wand generates the effect of the spell cause
fear (the reverse of the spell remove fear).

Wand of Fireballs: This wand generates fireballs, exactly as the
spell, doing 6d6 damage.

Wand of Illusion: This wand allows the user to create illusions
equivalent to the spell phantasmal force.

Wand of Lightning Bolts: This wand generates lightning bolts,
exactly as the spell, doing 6d6 damage.

Wand of Magic Detection: This wand grants the user a power
equivalent to the spell detect magic.

Wand of Paralyzation: This wand creates the effect of the spell
hold person.

Wand of Polymorph: This wand can be used to cast either
polymorph self or polymorph other.

Wand of Secret Door Detection: This wand grants the user a power
similar to the spell find traps, but which reveals secret doors
rather than traps.

Wand of Trap Detection: This wand grants the user a power
equivalent to the spell find traps.

Miscellaneous Magic Items

Amulet of Proof against Detection and Location: The wearer of
this item is immune to all forms of scrying (including crystal
balls, clairvoyance, clairaudience, and any other means of
location or spying at a distance) as well as any form of mind
reading (such as the spell ESP). Other characters who remain
within 30' of the wearer are also immune to scrying, but not to
mind reading.

Bag of Devouring: This bag appears to be an ordinary sack.
Detection for magical properties makes it seem as if it were a
bag of holding, and in fact it performs exactly like one when
first used. However, all items placed within disappear forever
1d6+6 turns later. The bag continues to weigh whatever it did
after the items were placed within it (that is, one-tenth the
total weight of the items), until it is again opened and
discovered to be empty.

Bag of Holding: This appears to be a common cloth sack about 2
feet by 4 feet in size. The bag of holding opens into an
extradimensional space, and is able to hold more than should be
possible: up to 500 pounds of weight, and up to 70 cubic feet of
volume. A bag of holding weighs one-tenth as much as the total
of the objects held within. Any object to be stored in a bag of
holding must fit through the opening, which has a circumference
of 4 feet.

If the bag is overloaded, or if sharp objects pierce it (from
inside or outside), the bag ruptures and is ruined. All
contents are lost forever. If a bag of holding is turned inside
out, its contents spill out, unharmed, but the bag must be put
right before it can be used again. If living creatures are
placed within the bag, they can survive for up to one turn,
after which time they suffocate. Retrieving a specific item
from a bag of holding takes a full round during which no
movement may be made.

Boots of Levitation: On command, these leather boots allow the
wearer to levitate as if by the spell of the same name.

Boots of Speed: The wearer of these boots can click his or her
boot heels together, thus activating a haste spell effect for
up to 10 rounds each day. The duration of the haste effect need
not be consecutive rounds; the boots can be turned off and on as
desired.

Boots of Traveling and Leaping: These boots increase the
wearer’s base land speed by an additional 10' per round. In
addition to this traveling ability, these boots allow the
wearer to make great leaps, jumping up to 10' high and/or 30'
across.

Bowl Commanding Water Elementals: This large container is
usually fashioned from blue or green semiprecious stone. It is
about 1 foot in diameter, half that deep, and relatively
fragile. When the bowl is filled with fresh water, and certain
words are spoken, a water elemental appears and follows the
commands of the summoner (as described for the Elemental
monster entry). The summoning words require 1 full round to
speak. Only one such elemental can be called per day.

Brazier Commanding Fire Elementals: This device appears to be a
normal container for holding burning coals. When a fire is lit
in the brazier and the proper summoning words are spoken, a
fire elemental appears and follows the commands of the summoner
(as described for the Elemental monster entry). The summoning
words require 1 full round to speak. Only one such elemental
can be called per day.

Broom of Flying: This broom is able to fly through the air for
up to 9 hours per day (split up as its owner desires). The
broom can carry 200 pounds and fly at a speed of 40 feet, or up
to 400 pounds at a speed at 30 feet. In addition, the broom can
travel alone to any destination named by the owner as long as
he or she has a good idea of the location and layout of that
destination. It comes to its owner from as far away as 300
yards when the command word is spoken.

Censer Commanding Air Elementals: This 6-inch-wide, 1-inch-high
perforated golden vessel resembles a thurible found in a place
of worship. If it is filled with incense and lit, summoning
words spoken over it summon forth an air elemental which
follows the commands of the summoner (as described for the
Elemental monster entry). The summoning words require 1 full
round to speak. Only one such elemental can be called per day.

Cloak of Displacement: This item appears to be a normal cloak,
but when worn by a character its magical properties distort and
warp light waves, causing the wearer's apparent location to
shift around constantly over a range of 3' from his or her true
location. The first melee or missile attack by any creature
against the wearer will miss, and all further attacks by that
attacker are made with an attack penalty of -2. This is not
cumulative with the penalty for fighting blind.

Crystal Ball: This is the most common form of scrying device, a
crystal sphere about 6 inches in diameter. They may only be
used by Magic-Users, who can use the device to see over
virtually any distance. A crystal ball can be used three times
per day, for up to a turn each time.

The chance of success when using a crystal ball is as shown
below. Total chances equal to or greater than 100% do not
require a roll.

Knowledge and Connection

Chance

Secondhand Knowledge (heard of)

25%

Firsthand Knowledge (seen briefly)

55%

Familiar (known well)

95%

Possession or garment

+25%

Body part, lock of hair, bit of nail, etc.

+50%

The user of the crystal ball is the only one who will see the
image. No sound will be heard normally. Detect magic, detect
evil, and ESP have a 3% chance per level of the caster of
operating correctly if used with a crystal ball.

Crystal Ball with Clairaudience: This item works exactly like
the standard crystal ball, above, but also allows the user to
hear any sounds in the location viewed as if he or she were
there.

Drums of Panic: These drums are kettle drums (hemispheres about
1-1/2 feet in diameter on stands). They come in pairs and are
unremarkable in appearance. If both of the pair are sounded,
all creatures of less than 6 hit dice within 120' (with the
exception of those within a 20' radius safe zone around the
drums) must save vs. Spells or flee in fear. The drums can be
used once per day.

Efreeti Bottle: This item is typically fashioned of brass or
bronze, with a lead stopper bearing special seals. A thin
stream of smoke is often seen issuing from it. The bottle can
be opened once per day. When opened, the efreeti imprisoned
within issues from the bottle instantly. There is a 10% chance
(01–10 on d%) that the efreeti is insane and attacks
immediately upon being released. There is also a 10% chance
(91–100) that the efreeti of the bottle grants three wishes.
In either case, the efreeti afterward disappears forever. The
other 80% of the time (11–90), the inhabitant of the bottle
loyally serves the character for up to an hour per day for 101
days (or until the efreeti’s death), doing as he or she
commands. After 101 days have passed, the efreeti is freed from
service and may return to its extradimensional home. Roll only
the first time the bottle is opened (or the GM may choose which
sort of bottle is found as he or she desires).

Elven Boots: These soft boots enable the wearer to move quietly
in virtually any surroundings, granting a 90% chance of success
when moving silently (as the Thief ability of the same name).

Elven Cloak: This cloak of neutral gray cloth is
indistinguishable from an ordinary cloak of the same color.
However, when worn with the hood drawn up around the head, the
wearer becomes nearly invisible, granting an 80% chance that
the wearer can move about unnoticed. If detected by onlookers,
the wearer can be attacked without significant penalty.

Flying Carpet: This rug is able to fly through the air on
command. A flying carpet is typically 5' x 8' in size and can
carry up to 500 pounds at a movement rate of 100' per round, or
up to 1000 pounds (its maximum capacity) at a rate of 50' per
round. A flying carpet can fly at any speed up to its maximum,
and can hover on command.

Gauntlets of Ogre Power: These gauntlets are made of tough
leather with iron studs running across the back of the hands
and fingers. They grant the wearer a Strength bonus of +4
(instead of his or her own Strength bonus). Both gauntlets must
be worn for the magic to be effective.

Girdle of Giant Strength: This item grants the wearer the
Strength of a giant. For so long as it is worn, the wearer
gains a Strength bonus of +5 (instead of his or her own
Strength bonus), and can throw large stones just as a stone
giant does.

Helm of Reading Languages and Magic: Appearing as a normal
helmet, this helm grants its wearer the ability to understand
the spoken words of any creature and to read text in any
language and any magical writing. Note that the limitations
described under the spell read languages apply to this device
also. Understanding a magical text does not necessarily imply
spell use.

Helm of Telepathy: The wearer can read the surface thoughts of a
target creature within 90' as if using the spell ESP.
Furthermore, he or she can send a telepathic message to anyone
whose surface thoughts are thus being read (allowing two-way
communication). This helm may be used up to three times per
day.

Helm of Teleportation: A character wearing this device may
teleport three times per day, exactly as if he or she had cast
the spell of the same name.

Horn of Blasting: This horn appears to be a normal trumpet. It
can be sounded as a normal horn, but if the command word is
spoken and the instrument is then played, it deals 2d6 points
of damage to creatures within a cone 40' long and 40' wide at
the far end, and causes them to be deafened for 2d6 rounds.
Affected creatures may save vs. Death Ray, taking half damage
and avoiding deafness if the save is made. Crystalline
creatures take double damage. Nonliving creatures are generally
immune to deafness, but still suffer damage as described.

If a horn of blasting is used magically more than once in a
given day, there is a 10% cumulative chance with each extra use
that it explodes and deals 3d6 points of damage to the person
sounding it.

The horn can also be used to damage or destroy buildings,
fortifications, etc. Double the damage listed above when a horn
of blasting is used against a structure. The Stronghold rules in
the Game Master section contains further guidance on this.

Medallion of ESP: This appears to be a normal pendant disk hung
from a neck chain. Usually fashioned from bronze, copper, or
nickel-silver, the medallion allows the wearer to read the
thoughts of others, as with the spell ESP. It can be used as
many times per day as desired, but each such usage requires a
minimum of 1 round of full concentration to activate, and the
wearer must continue to concentrate to maintain the effect.

Mirror of Life Trapping: This crystal device is usually about 4
feet square and framed in metal or wood. It can be hung or
placed on a surface and then activated by giving a command
word. Only a Magic-User can properly control this device. The
same command word deactivates the mirror. The character who
activates the device is immune to it. The mirror has twenty
extradimensional cells within it; any creature coming within
30' of the device and looking at its own reflection must make a
save vs. Spells or be trapped within the mirror in one of the
cells.

When a creature is trapped, it is taken bodily into the mirror.
Size is not a factor, but constructs and undead are not
trapped. A victim’s equipment (including clothing and anything
being carried) is taken also. The mirror’s owner can call the
reflection of any creature trapped within to its surface and
engage the powerless prisoner in conversation. He or she can
also free any trapped creature by verbal command.

If the mirror’s capacity is exceeded, one victim (determined
randomly) is set free in order to accommodate the latest one.
If the mirror is broken, all victims currently trapped in it
are freed.

Rope of Climbing: This 50' long rope is no thicker than a wand,
but it is strong enough to support 3,000 pounds. Upon command,
the rope snakes forward, upward, downward, or in any other
direction at 10' per round, attaching itself securely wherever
its owner desires. It can unfasten itself and return in the
same manner. The rope must have something to tie itself to in
order to support weight other than its own. One end of the rope
must be held by the user when its magic is invoked.

Scarab of Protection: This device appears to be a silver
medallion in the shape of a beetle. The scarab absorbs
energy-draining attacks, death effects, and curses. Upon
absorbing 2d6 such attacks, the scarab crumbles to dust and is
destroyed.

Stone Commanding Earth Elementals: A stone of this nature is
typically an oddly shaped piece of roughly polished rock. The
possessor of such a stone need but utter a few words of
summoning, and a Huge earth elemental comes to the summoner and
follows the commands of the summoner (as described for the
Elemental monster entry). The summoning words require 1 full
round to speak. Only one such elemental can be called per day.

PART 8: GAME MASTER INFORMATION

Wandering Monsters

We had the foresight to bring several large sacks with us, and
we swiftly filled them with coins and gems from beneath the
sarcophagus. Without further delay we moved out, intent upon
reaching the stairs to the surface and then returning to
Morgansfort. But it couldn't be that easy…

On the way in, Barthal scouted ahead and we took our time,
constantly on the lookout for monsters. On the way out, we
threw caution to the wind, moving at full speed with Barthal
watching behind us. So it was that Morningstar and I turned a
corner and practically stepped on the first rank of a goblin
patrol!

Once again I was caught flatfooted, but so were the goblins.
Morningstar reacted more swiftly, striking down the first of
the little monsters. You might think that parley would have
been a better idea, but we had already tried that with these
goblins without success… so I couldn't blame the Elf for
striking first and asking questions later.

I raised the golden sword and waded into battle…

Dungeon Encounters

Besides “placed” monsters, dungeons usually contain wandering
monsters. The Game Master may create special wandering monster
tables for specific dungeons, or the general wandering monster
tables (below) may be used.

In an average dungeon, a wandering monster encounter will occur
on a roll of 1 on 1d6; the Game Master should check once every
3 turns. The circumstances of a specific dungeon may call for
higher odds or more frequent (or possibly less frequent)
wandering monster checks.

Die Roll

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

1

Bee, Giant

Beetle, Giant Bombardier

Ant, Giant

2

Goblin

Fly, Giant

Ape, Carnivorous

3

Green Slime*

Ghoul

Beetle, Giant Tiger

4

Kobold

Gnoll

Bugbear

5

NPC Party: Adventurer

Gray Ooze

Doppleganger

6

NPC Party: Bandit

Hobgoblin

Gargoyle*

7

Orc

Lizard Man

Gelatinous Cube

8

Skeleton

NPC Party: Adventurer

Lycanthrope, Wererat*

9

Snake, Cobra

Snake, Pit Viper

Ogre

10

Spider, Giant Crab

Spider, Giant Black Widow

Shadow*

11

Stirge

Troglodyte

Tentacle Worm

12

Wolf

Zombie

Wight*

Die Roll

Level 4-5

Level 6-7

Level 8+

1

Bear, Cave

Basilisk

Black Pudding

2

Caecilia, Giant

Black Pudding

Chimera

3

Cockatrice

Caecilia

Giant, Hill

4

Doppleganger

Displacer

Giant, Stone

5

Gray Ooze

Hydra

Hydra

6

Hellhound

Lycanthrope, Weretiger*

Lycanthrope, Wereboar*

7

Lycanthrope, Werewolf*

Mummy*

Purple Worm

8

Minotaur

Owlbear

Salamander, Flame*

9

Ochre Jelly*

Rust Monster*

Salamander, Frost*

10

Owlbear

Scorpion, Giant

Vampire*

11

Rust Monster*

Spectre*

12

Wraith*

Troll

Wilderness Encounters

The Game Master should check for random encounters in the
wilderness about every four hours of game time; this translates
nicely to three night checks and three daytime checks. If your
players choose to stand three night watches, you simply check
for each watch; in the daytime, check morning, afternoon, and
evening.

To check for a wilderness encounter, roll 1d6; on a roll of 1,
an encounter occurs. If a wilderness encounter is indicated,
roll 2d8 on the appropriate table below. The Game Master should
think carefully about how the encounter happens; check for
surprise in advance, and if the monster is not surprised, it
may be considered to have had time to set up an ambush (at the
GM's option).

Die Roll

Desert or Barren

Grassland

Inhabited Territories

2

Dragon, Blue

Dragon, Green

Dragon, Gold

3

Hellhound

Troll

Ghoul

4

Giant, Fire

Fly, Giant

Bugbear

5

Purple Worm

Scorpion, Giant

Goblin

6

Fly, Giant

NPC Party: Bandit

Centaur

7

Scorpion, Giant

Lion

NPC Party: Bandit

8

Camel

Boar, Wild

NPC Party: Merchant

9

Spider, Giant Tarantula

NPC Party: Merchant

NPC Party: Pilgrim

10

NPC Party: Merchant

Wolf

NPC Party: Noble

11

Hawk

Bee, Giant

Dog

12

NPC Party: Bandit

Gnoll

Gargoyle*

13

Ogre

Goblin

Gnoll

14

Griffon

Blink Dog

Ogre

15

Gnoll

Wolf, Dire

Minotaur

16

Dragon, Red

Giant, Hill

Vampire*

Die Roll

Jungle

Mountains or Hills

Ocean

2

Dragon, Green

Dragon, White

Dragon, Sea

3

NPC Party: Bandit

Roc (1d6: 1-3 Large, 4-5 Huge, 6 Giant)

Hydra

4

Goblin

Displacer

Whale, Sperm

5

Hobgoblin

Lycanthrope, Werewolf*

Crocodile, Giant

6

Centipede, Giant

Mountain Lion

Crab, Giant

7

Snake, Giant Python

Wolf

Whale, Killer

8

Elephant

Spider, Giant Crab

Octopus, Giant

9

Antelope

Hawk

Shark, Mako

10

Jaguar

Orc

NPC Party: Merchant

11

Stirge

Bat, Giant

NPC Party: Buccaneer (Pirate)

12

Beetle, Giant Tiger

Hawk, Giant

Shark, Bull

13

Caecilia, Giant

Giant, Hill

Roc (1d8: 1-5 Huge, 6-8 Giant)

14

Shadow*

Chimera

Shark, Great White

15

NPC Party: Merchant

Wolf, Dire

Mermaid

16

Lycanthrope, Weretiger*

Dragon, Red

Sea Serpent

Die Roll

River or Riverside

Swamp

Woods or Forest

2

Dragon, Black

Dragon, Black

Dragon, Green

3

Fish, Giant Piranha

Shadow*

Alicorn (see Unicorn)

4

Stirge

Troll

Treant

5

Fish, Giant Bass

Lizard, Giant Draco

Orc

6

NPC Party: Merchant

Centipede, Giant

Boar, Wild

7

Lizardman

Leech, Giant

Bear, Black

8

Crocodile

Lizardman

Hawk, Giant

9

Frog, Giant

Crocodile

Antelope

10

Fish, Giant Catfish

Stirge

Wolf

11

NPC Party: Buccaneer

Orc

Ogre

12

Troll

Toad, Giant (see Frog, Giant)

Bear, Brown

13

Jaguar

Troglodyte

Wolf, Dire

14

Nixie

Blood Rose

Giant, Hill

15

Water Termite, Giant

Hangman Tree

Owlbear

16

Dragon, Green

Basilisk

Unicorn

City, Town or Village Encounters

It's important for the Game Master to remember that, unlike
dungeon or wilderness environments, cities, towns and villages
are busy places. During the day, most towns will have people on
the streets more or less all the time; the absence of people on
the streets is often an indication of something interesting. By
night, much of the town will be dark and quiet, and encounters
will be mostly Thieves or other unsavory types; but near
popular eating (or drinking) establishments, people of all
sorts are still likely to be encountered. The GM must make sure
that his or her descriptions of the town environment make this
clear; of course, this will also make it harder for the players
to identify “real” encounters.

[-- Image: graphics61 --]The GM is encouraged to create his or
her own encounter tables for use in each city, town or village
created (or assign encounters by other means if desired);
however, a set of “generic” encounter tables are provided below
for those times when such preparation has not been completed.
Roll 2d6 on the table below to determine what sort of encounter
occurs; a description of each type of encounter appears below
the table.

Die Roll

Day Encounter

Night Encounter

2

Doppleganger

Doppleganger

3

Noble

Shadow*

4

Thief

Press Gang

5

Bully

Beggar

6

City Watch

Thief

7

Merchant

Bully

8

Beggar

Merchant

9

Priest

Giant Rat

10

Mercenary

City Watch

11

Wizard

Wizard

12

Lycanthrope, Wererat*

Lycanthrope, Wererat*

Beggar encounters will often begin with a single beggar
approaching the party, but there will generally be 2d4 beggars
in the area, and if any party member gives anything to the
first beggar, the others will descend on the party like flies.
Each beggar is 90% likely to be a normal man, and 10% likely to
be a 1st level Thief, possibly scouting for the Thieves Guild or
a local gang.

Bully encounters will be with 2d4 young toughs; each is 70%
likely to be a normal man, 30% likely to be a 1st level
Fighter. Bullies generally appear unarmed, depending on their
brawling ability in a fight (but keeping a dagger or shortsword
hidden, to be used in case the fight is going against them).
Bullies can be a bit unpredictable, such that the GM may want
to use a reaction roll to determine the leader's mood.

City Watch encounters will be with 2d6 watchmen, all 1st level
Fighters save for the squad leader, who will be from 2nd
through 4th level. They will confront “suspicious-looking”
characters, but generally will need a good reason before they
attempt to arrest or otherwise interfere with player
characters.

Doppleganger encounters will, of course, appear to be some other
type of encounter; the GM should roll again to determine what
the doppleganger is masquerading as. 1d6 dopplegangers will be
encountered; any extra group members will be humans who do not
know they are traveling in the company of shapeshifting
monsters. If the party is “interesting” to the dopplegangers,
one or more of the monsters will attempt to follow them and
replace a party member (as described in the monster
description). In many cases, player character parties will not
discover the true nature of the encounter until much later.

Giant Rat encounters will generally involve alleys, the docks,
or other “low” places. Rats are generally not dangerous unless
provoked, but if surprised they may attack. See the monster
description for details of this encounter type.

Lycanthrope, Wererat encounters will appear to be some other
type of encounter, either another sort of “normal” encounter or
a giant rat encounter (depending on the circumstances). Wererats
are cowardly and will not attack a party of equal or larger
size.

Mercenary encounters will involve 2d6 members of a mercenary
company, going about some business or other. A mercenary leader
may offer a position to Fighter-classed player characters if
they have any reputation at all.

Merchants are a common feature of towns, and may be encountered
performing any sort of business. As with mercenary encounters,
merchants may offer jobs to interesting player characters,
particularly those with good reputations. See Creating an NPC
Party, below, for details on this type of encounter. (A
merchant in a town may not have a full entourage as described
below; the GM should use his or her discretion in creating the
encounter.)

Nobles encountered may also offer positions to player
characters, or possibly offer a reward for some dangerous task.
Player characters with bad reputations may be confronted,
ordered to leave town, or even arrested if the noble is able to
call for the city watch. (See Creating an NPC Party, below, for
details on this type of encounter.) A noble in a town may not
have a full entourage as described below; the GM should use his
or her discretion in creating the encounter.

Press Gangs will consist of 2d6 Fighters, all 1st level except
for one or two leaders of 2nd through 5th level. They will be
armed with blunt weapons or possibly will fight with their bare
hands, since their goal is to capture rather than kill player
characters; however, it is likely that at least some members of
a press gang will have daggers or swords on their persons in
case a serious fight breaks out. A press gang will not confront
a party of equal or greater size unless the party is obviously
weakened, drunk, etc. If the party loses, they will awaken
aboard a ship at sea or in a military camp (depending on
whether sailors or soldiers captured them), unarmed and at the
mercy of their captors.

Priest encounters will usually be similar to a group of pilgrims
(see Creating an NPC Party, below, for details), though the
group encountered will not be as large as would be encountered
in the wilderness. Generally, a single priest of 1st through
4th level will be encountered, accompanied by 1d4 of the
faithful.

Shadow encounters in a town will be much like the same encounter
underground; see the monster description for details.

Thief encounters will be with a group of 1d6 Thieves, generally
disguised as ordinary townsmen or sometimes as beggars. One
Thief in the group will be from 2nd to 4th level, with the
others being 1st level only. They will seek to steal from the
party, of course, unless watched very carefully.

Wizard encounters will involve a Magic-User of 4th through 7th
level, accompanied by 1d4-1 apprentices of 1st level. The GM
must decide on the temperament and mood of the wizard.

Creating An NPC Party

Adventurers

[-- Image: graphics2 --]A party of NPC adventurers will usually
consist of 4-8 characters, as follows: 1d3 Fighters, 1d2
Thieves, 1d2 Clerics, and 1d2-1 Magic-Users. Usually the
characters will all be of similar levels; after deciding what
average level the party should be, you may wish to make a few
of the characters lower levels (to reflect the usual
“replacements” brought in when some characters die).

The Game Master must choose the race(s) of the NPC adventurers
to suit the region they are found in (or come from). Probably
80% or more of adventurers are Human, 10% are Dwarves, 6% are
Halfling and the remaining 4% Elvish. If the NPC adventurer
party is evil, the GM may choose to replace some party members
with humanoid monsters such as orcs, hobgoblins, or gnolls.

The party may be rivals with the player characters, vying for
the same treasures, or they may actually be enemies, evil
marauders that the player characters must defeat. It is, of
course, possible that the NPC adventurers are allied or
otherwise friendly with the player characters, but this may
make things too easy for the players.

Bandits, Brigands, and Highwaymen

A party of bandits will generally consist of 2d12 1st level
Fighters and 1d6 1st level Thieves, led by a Fighter or Thief
of 2nd to 5th level (1d4+1) or by one of each class (if there
are 11 or more 1st level members total). In the wilderness,
bandits will generally have horses or other steeds appropriate
to the terrain (stolen, of course) as well as light armor,
swords and bows or crossbows. Determine magic items as given
below for the leaders only; rank-and-file members will not
normally have magic items.

In their lair or hideout, a party of bandits will generally have
type A treasure (with magic items omitted since they will have
already been generated using the rules below).

Buccaneers and Pirates

[-- Image: graphics1 --]The difference between buccaneers and
pirates is largely a question of what they wish to be called;
whatever you call them, they are waterborne equivalents of
bandits, attacking other ships or raiding coastal towns for
plunder.

A buccaneer party will consist of 3d8 1st level Fighters, led by
a Fighter of 3rd to 6th level (1d4+2) and 1d3 Fighters of 2nd to
5th level. All will be experienced at handling ships, of course.
They will be unarmored or armored only in leather, and will be
armed with swords and bows or crossbows.

Seagoing pirates may appear in larger numbers, but the number of
leader-types will be similar to that given above. Generate magic
items for leaders only as described below. A shipload of pirates
or buccaneers will have a type A treasure, with magic items
omitted (since magic items will already have been rolled for
the NPCs); the treasure may not be aboard the ship, however, as
pirates often prefer to bury their treasures on islands. In such
a case, the Captain or one of his mates will have a treasure map
leading to the location of the treasure.

Merchants

Merchants must often transport their wares through wilderness
areas. Roughly half of the time (50%), a land-bound merchant
party will be led by a single wealthy merchant; other merchant
parties will consist of 1d4+1 less wealthy merchants who have
banded together for their own safety. There will be 2d4 wagons
(but at least one per merchant) drawn by horses or mules. Each
wagon is driven by a teamster who is a normal man, usually
unarmored and armed with a dagger or shortsword. The caravan
will employ 1d4+2 first-level Fighters and 1d4 second-level
Fighters as guards.

If encountered at sea, a merchant party will generally consist
of a single ship owned or rented by a single merchant. The ship
will have a crew of 2d8+8 regular crewmen, who are normal men,
unarmored and armed with clubs, daggers or shortswords; the
Captain, First Mate, and other officers are taken from this
number. Large ships may require larger crews. 1d4+2 first-level
Fighters and 1d4 second-level Fighters will be aboard as guards,
just as with a caravan.

Besides the valuable but undoubtedly bulky trade goods
transported by the merchant caravan or ship, such a party will
also have a type A treasure, with magic items omitted; it may
be in one chest, or spread out among the wagons.

Nobles

A noble party will consist of a noble (of course), possibly
accompanied by a spouse (also a noble, of course) and/or one or
more children. Each adult noble will have at least one attendant
(assistant, lady-in-waiting, etc.).

Lower-ranking nobles (such as barons) will have a single wagon
or carriage, drawn by fine horses; higher-ranking nobles will
have two or more wagons. The noble may be mounted on a
warhorse, though he or she may choose to ride in a carriage
part of the time. Each carriage or wagon will have a teamster,
who in this case will be a 1st level Fighter in chainmail with
a longsword. At least two mounted Fighters of 1st through 4th
level will be with the noble as guards; again, higher ranking
nobles will have more guards. Guards will generally be armed
with longswords and possibly lances, armored in platemail, and
their warhorses will usually be barded with chainmail.
Determining the exact number of guards is left to the GM in
this case. The normal chances for magic items apply, of course.

A noble will usually be traveling with a little spending money;
a type A treasure should be rolled to represent this. In this
case, do not omit the magic items, as nobles will generally be
more wealthy than the average party of men.

Nobles are usually (70%) normal men; otherwise, roll 1d10: 1-6
indicates a Fighter, 7-8 indicates a Magic-User, 9 indicates a
Cleric, and 10 indicates a Thief. (Clerical “nobles” are
bishops, archbishops, and the like.) Roll 2d4-1 for the level
of each “classed” noble.

Pilgrims

A party of pilgrims is on its way to (or from) a major religious
locale or activity. Such a party will be led by a 1d4 Clerics of
level 1-4 (roll for each).

The remainder of the party is rather random in nature; most
pilgrim groups include 3d6 normal men (or women if the religion
allows women to go on pilgrimages), 1d6 Fighters of level 1-4
(roll for each) with chainmail and longsword, and 1d4 Thieves
of level 1-4 (each of whom may be a genuine devout person, or
possibly just on the lam). There is also a 50% chance of a
single Magic-User of level 1-4 being with the party.

Pilgrims usually travel light, carrying a single bag each and
walking or riding mules or horses. The pilgrim party will most
likely be bringing offerings of some sort to their destination;
generate a type A treasure for this purpose. If magic items are
indicated, they will most likely not be used by any of the NPCs
as they have already been dedicated to the god or pantheon.

Magic Items for NPCs

NPCs will generally have magic items in proportion to their
class and level; assume a 5% chance per level that any given
Fighter, Thief or Cleric NPC will have a magic weapon or magic
armor (roll for weapon and armor separately for each NPC).
Regardless of level, a roll of 96-00 should be considered a
failure. Magic-Users will have a Ring of Protection (roll the
bonus as usual for the item) on a roll of 4% per level, and a
magic dagger or walking staff on a roll of 3% per level.

In addition, assume a 2% per level chance that any given
character will have a potion, and 3% per level that a Cleric or
Magic-User will have a scroll of some sort.

Finally, add up the levels of all members of the party, and use
this number as a percentage chance that a Miscellaneous Magic
item will be found among them. If the roll is made, divide the
number by two and roll again; if the second roll is made, two
such items are found. If the party has more than 3 members, you
might wish to divide the number in half again and roll for a
third such item. Assign the Miscellaneous Magic item or items
to whichever party members seem most appropriate, or roll
randomly if you can't decide.

Demi-Human Parties

It is assumed above that NPC parties will be Human, or
predominantly so; but the Game Master may choose to present
parties of Elves, Dwarves, or Halflings from time to time. In
general, a party of demi-humans will be homogeneous…. an Elf
party would consist of all Elves, for instance. If encountered
in the territory of another race, the demi-human party might
include a guide hired to lead them to their destination. For
example, the Elf party mentioned above might hire a Human guide
to help them when traveling through a Human country.

The Game Master may simply use the figures given above when
generating such parties. One thing that the GM must decide is
whether or not the “normal men” rules apply to demi-humans… are
there “normal elves” for instance? This decision is left to the
GM. If there are such characters, they will have the same
racial abilities as others of their race, but will fight with
an Attack Bonus of +0 just as normal men do. If there are no
such characters in the campaign world, then simply substitute
1st level Fighters for the normal men listed above.

Dealing with Players

Character Creation Options

The standard character creation rules call for rolling 3d6 for
each Ability Score in order. Players may complain that they
can't create the sort of characters they want to play. Here are
several options you may choose from if you wish to make things
easier for your players. Note that the players must not be
allowed to demand these options; it's purely the decision of
the Game Master.

Point Swapping: Allow the player to “move” points from one
Ability Score to another, at a rate of -2 to one score for each
+1 added to the other. The maximum score is still 18 (or the
racial maximum if lower), and the player should not be allowed
to lower any score below 9.

Score Swapping: Let the player exchange any two Ability Scores,
once per character.

The Full Shuffle: Let the player arrange the six Ability Score
values as he or she wishes. This allows the most customization
for the player, but on the other hand you may find that all
player characters in your campaign begin to look very much
alike. It's not uncommon for players to “dump” the lowest
statistic in Charisma, for instance.

Hopeless Characters

Sometimes a player will look at the six scores rolled, and
declare the character “hopeless.” The Game Master should always
allow the player to scrap a character with less than 9 in the
first four scores (since all four classes would be unavailable
to that character). However, you as the Game Master might
choose to allow the player to reroll a character with scores
that are overall below average even if the character isn't as
“hopeless” as this.

Here's a suggestion: Sum up the Ability Score bonuses or
penalties that apply to the character. If the total is
negative, consider the character below average, and allow the
player to scratch the entire set of scores and reroll. If the
total is zero, the character is “average,” and the player
probably should go ahead and play the character as rolled.
Obviously, if the total is greater than zero, the character
should be played as rolled.

Acquisition of Spells

Clerics have an obvious advantage over Magic-Users, in that, in
theory, they have access to any spell of any level which they
can cast. However, note that Clerics are limited in their spell
selection based on their deity, faith or ethos; for instance, a
Cleric of the goddess of healing should not be surprised that
his or her deity refuses to grant reversed healing spells. If a
Cleric prays for a spell that is not allowed, the Game Master
may choose to grant the character a different spell, or
optionally (if the deity is angered) no spell at all for that
“slot.”

Magic-Users begin play knowing two spells, read magic plus one
other (unless the GM grants more starting spells). Each time
the character gains a level, he or she gains the ability to
cast more spells; in addition, every other level the Magic-User
gains access to the next higher level spells (until all levels
are available). However, gaining the ability to cast these
spells does not necessarily mean the Magic-User instantly
learns new spells.

As previously described, Magic-Users may learn spells by being
taught by another Magic-User, or by studying another
Magic-User's spellbook. If being taught, a spell can be learned
in a single day; researching another Magic-User's spellbook
takes one day per spell level. In either case, the spell
learned must be transcribed into the Magic-User's own
spellbook, at a cost of 500 gp per spell level transcribed.

A Magic-User may add a new spell of any level he or she may cast
at any point; however, spells of higher levels may not be
learned or added to the Magic-User's spellbook. The Magic-User
must find a teacher or acquire a reference work (such as
another Magic-User's spellbook) in order to learn new spells,
and the cost of such is in addition to the costs given above.
Often a Magic-User will maintain a relationship with his or her
original master, who will teach the character new spells either
for free or in return for services. Sometimes two Magic-Users
will agree to exchange known spells. However, in many cases the
only option available to a Magic-User will be to pay another
Magic-User (often an NPC) anywhere from 100 gp to 1000 gp per
spell level in return for such training.

Magic-Users may also create entirely new spells (or alter
existing spells); see the Magic Research rules, below, for
details.

Weapon and Armor Restrictions

Several races and classes have weapon and/or armor restrictions
applied to them. What happens when a player declares that his
or her character is going to use a prohibited weapon or wear
prohibited armor?

Clerics: The prohibition against edged weapons is a matter of
faith for Clerics. Therefore, if a Cleric uses a prohibited
weapon, he or she immediately loses access to his or her spells
as well as the power to Turn the Undead. A higher-level NPC
Cleric of the same faith must assign some quest to the
miscreant, which he or she must complete, in order to atone and
regain his or her powers. If the character is unrepentant, then
he or she is changed permanently from a Cleric to a Fighter.
Refigure the character's level, applying the current XP total
to the Fighter table to determine this. Hit points and attack
bonus remain the same; change the attack bonus only after a new
level is gained as a Fighter, and roll Fighter hit dice as
normal when levels are gained.

Magic-Users: These characters are simply untrained in any weapon
other than those normally allowed to them, and should suffer a
-5 attack penalty when using any prohibited weapon. A
Magic-User in armor can't cast spells at all; any such attempt
fails, and the spell is lost.

Thieves: Wearing armor heavier, more restrictive and/or noisier
than leather armor prevents the use of any Thief ability,
including the Sneak Attack ability. Thieves may choose to wear
such armor, but this only makes them a poor excuse for a
Fighter.

Dwarves and Halflings: These characters are prohibited from
using large weapons, mainly due to their small stature and
relatively low weight. It's hard to swing a weapon when the
weapon is trying to swing you. If such a character tries to use
a prohibited weapon, the Game Master may either apply a -5
attack penalty based on the difficulty of using the weapon, or
alternately declare the attempt unsuccessful, at his or her
option.

Judging Wishes

Wishes are one of the most potentially unbalancing things in the
game. With a carefully worded wish, a player character can make
sweeping, dramatic changes in the game world, possibly even
rewriting history. Before allowing the player characters in
your game access to even one wish, think about how you will
deal with it.

Wishes are granted by a variety of beings. Even when a wish
comes from a device (a ring or a sword, for instance), some
extradimensional being, god or devil or whatever, has placed
that wish in the device. A wish will tend to further the goals
of the granting being; if the granter is an evil efreeti, for
instance, it will attempt to twist the meaning or intent of the
wish so that it does not really accomplish what the player
character wants. On the other hand, if the granter is one of
the good powers, it will grant the wish as intended so long at
the player character isn't being greedy or spiteful.

Game balance is the main issue that must be considered. Using a
wish to heal the entire party, teleport everyone without error
to a distant location, or to avoid or redo a catastrophic
battle, is reasonable. A wish that a character be restored to
life and health is reasonable, but a wish that not only
restores but also improves the character is not.

In general, a wish is granted with at least literal accuracy…
the words of the wish must be fulfilled. The exception is
wishes that are unreasonable for game balance purposes; they
are still at least literally interpreted, but may be only
partially granted. In the last example above, for instance, the
granting power would likely restore the character to life and
health but ignore the “improvements” wished for.

Optional Rules

Death and Dying

The rules state that, at zero hit points, the character is dead.
If this is too harsh for you, here are several approaches to
changing the situation:

Raise Dead: The first approach doesn't change the rules a bit.
Arrange matters so that characters killed in an adventure can
be easily raised (but at a substantial cost). This not only
“deals” with the mortality issue, it also soaks up excess
treasure, preventing the player characters from becoming too
rich to be interested in adventuring. It also tends to reward
the cautious (since they get to keep their gold more often).

What if the characters don't have enough money when they die to
afford to be raised? Allow the local religious establishment to
raise dead adventurers in return for their indenture… that is,
the adventurers, upon being restored to life, owe the church or
temple the money it would have cost to be raised, or an
equivalent service. Thus, the local religious leaders would
have a ready pool of adventurers to undertake dangerous
missions for them.

But the adventurer(s) are dead… how can they agree to the
indenture? There are two options: the priests can use speak
with dead to attain agreement, or the adventurers can sign an
agreement with the church before leaving on the potentially
dangerous adventure. The latter might even be considered a
standard procedure in some places.

Save vs. Death: The first actual rule alteration is to allow
characters reduced to zero hit points to save vs. Death Ray to
avoid death. If the save is failed, the character is
immediately dead, just as in the normal rules. If the save is
made, the character remains alive for 2d10 rounds; if the
character's wounds are bound (or he or she receives healing
magic) within this time frame, death is averted. The character
remains unconscious for the full 2d10 rounds rolled, either
dying if left untreated or awakening if his or her wounds are
bound.

Binding the wounds of the dying character stabilizes him or her
at zero hit points. Non-magical healing will require a full
week to restore the first hit point; after this, healing
proceeds at the normal rate.

Magical healing will restore the character to whatever total is
rolled on the healing die roll (up to the usual maximum of
course).

Note that any spellcaster reduced to zero hit points who
subsequently survives loses all remaining prepared spells.

This rule might be combined with the suggestions under Raise
Dead, above.

Negative Hit Points: Instead of stopping at zero hit points,
keep track of the current negative figure. At the end of each
round after he or she falls, the character loses an additional
hit point. If a total of -10 is reached, the character is dead.
Before this point is reached, the character may have his or her
wounds bound and/or receive magical healing, which will
stabilize the character. The injured character may not move
more than a few feet without help, nor fight, nor cast spells,
until his or her hit points are again greater than zero. This
rule should not be combined with the Save vs. Death option.

Just as with the Save vs. Death rule, spellcasters who survive
being reduced to zero or negative hit points lose all currently
prepared spells.

As a further option, the GM may choose to use a negative number
equal to the character's Constitution score rather than a
straight -10.

“Save or Die” Poison

[-- Image: graphics9 --]Poisons tend to kill characters
instantly; this is another place where the Game Master may find
the mortality rate of player characters a bit too high. On the
other hand, poisons should be scary. Here's an optional rule
which may make things a bit easier without entirely removing
the fear from poison:

Where a “save or die” poison is indicated, the victim must make
a save vs. Poison or suffer 1d6 damage per round for 6 rounds,
starting the round following the exposure to the poison; this
is an average of 21 points of damage, but even a first level
character might survive with a combination of luck and healing
magic. The GM may create poisons which vary from these figures,
of course. If the Negative Hit Points optional rule is being
used, it is suggested to increase the poison duration to 10
rounds (an average 35 points).

Awarding Experience Points for Treasure Gained

The Game Master may also assign experience points for treasure
gained, at a rate of 1 GP = 1 XP. This is optional; GMs wishing
to advance their players to higher levels more quickly may
choose to do this, while those preferring a more leisurely pace
should omit it. If experience is awarded for treasure, it should
be awarded only for treasure acquired and returned to a place of
safety. Alternately, the GM may require treasure to be spent on
training in order to count it for experience. This is a highly
effective way to remove excess treasure from the campaign.

Ability Rolls

There will be times when a player character tries to do
something in the game that seems to have no rule covering it.
In some of those cases, the only attribute the PC has that
seems appropriate may be an Ability Score. Here is a suggested
method for making rolls against Ability Scores that still gives
better odds to higher level characters:

The player rolls 1d20 and adds his or her Ability Bonus for the
score the GM thinks is most appropriate, as well as any
situational bonus or penalty the GM assigns. Consult the
following table. If the total rolled is equal to or higher than
the given Target number, the roll is a success.

Level

Target

NM or 1

17

2-3

16

4-5

15

6-7

14

8-9

13

10-11

12

12-13

11

14-15

10

16-17

9

18-19

8

20

7

Preparing Spells from Memory

Sometimes a Magic-User will want to prepare spells, but his or
her spellbook may be unavailable; this includes when the book
is destroyed as well as times when the Magic-User has been
captured or trapped.

A Magic-User can always prepare read magic from memory. Other
spells require an Intelligence ability roll, as described
above, with the spell level as a penalty on the die.

Failure exhausts the spell slot being prepared, just as if it
had been successfully prepared and then cast; so if a 5th level
Magic-User attempts to prepare fireball from memory, and fails,
he or she will have no 3rd level spells for the day.

Thief Abilities

Some players of Thieves may wish to have more control over their
Thief abilities. If you study the Thief Abilities table, you'll
discover its secret: From levels 2-9, the Thief improves 30
percentiles (total) each level; from levels 10-15, 20
percentiles; and from level 16 on, 10 percentiles. If you wish
to allow Thief customization, simply let the player allocate
these points as he or she wishes rather than following the
table. Allow no more than 10 percentiles to be added to any
single Thief ability per level gain. Note also that no Thief
ability may be raised above 99 percent.

Magical Research

General Rules for Research

At some point a Magic-User or Cleric may wish to start creating
magic items or inventing spells. This is termed magical
research. For any research, Magic-User must have a tower or
laboratory, while a Cleric requires a properly consecrated
temple or church of his or her faith. In addition, there will
be a cost for the creation of each item, a minimum time
required to create it, and a given chance of success. If the
roll fails, generally the time and money are wasted and the
procedure must be started again from the beginning; however,
consult the detailed rules below for exceptions.

In almost all cases, the Game Master should make this roll in
secret. There are many situations where the character (or the
player) should not know whether the roll has actually failed,
or whether the GM has decided the research is impossible for
the character. The GM may decide to tell the player that the
research is impossible if the roll succeeds; if the roll is a
failure, that is all the player should be told.

In general, Clerics may only create magic items reproducing the
effects of Clerical spells; Clerics may also make enchanted
weapons and armor, even those sorts which they may not use
themselves (since they may be creating weapons or armor for
other followers of their faith). Magic-Users may create any
sort of magic item except for those reproducing Clerical spells
for which no equivalent Magic-User spell exists.

Time spent doing magical research must be eight-hour workdays
with interruptions lasting no more than two days. Longer
interruptions result in automatic failure of the project.

The GM may, if he or she so desires, grant Experience Points to
characters who successfully complete magical research. It is
suggested that the rate of such awards be 1 XP per 10 gp spent
on the research. This award may be granted for all research, or
only for creation of magic items, or not at all if the GM
prefers to emphasize adventuring for advancement purposes.

Spell Research

Researching new spells is the most common type of magical
research. A Magic-User may research a standard spell, removing
the need for a teacher or reference; alternately, a Cleric or
Magic-User may research an entirely new spell. Of course, no
character may invent or research a spell of a level higher than
he or she can cast.

If the character is inventing a spell outright, the GM must
determine the spell's level and judge whether or not the spell
is possible “as is.” The GM does not have to tell the player
whether the spell is possible, and in fact this may be
preferable.

The cost to research a spell is 1,000 gp per spell level for
“standard” spells, or 2,000 gp per spell level for newly
invented spells; in either case, one week is required per spell
level to complete the research. The chance of success is 25%,
plus 5% per level of the character, minus 10% per level of the
spell; the maximum chance of success is 95%.

If the research roll is successful, the character may add the
spell to his or her spellbook (if a Magic-User) or may
subsequently pray for the spell (if a Cleric). On a failure,
the money and time are spent to no avail. Clerics of the same
deity, faith or ethos may teach each other the prayers required
to access new spells; this takes one hour per spell level. The
procedure to exchange spells with other Magic-Users has already
been explained (under Acquisition of Spells, above).

As mentioned above, the GM may decide that a proposed new spell
is not “correct” for his or her campaign; too powerful, too low
in level, etc. Rather than tell the player this, there are two
strategies that may be used.

First, the Game Master may decide to revise the spell. If the
roll is a success, the GM then presents the player with a
revised writeup of the spell, adjusted however the GM feels
necessary for game balance purposes.

The alternative, more appropriate when the GM believes the spell
should be higher level than the player character can cast, is to
make the roll anyway. If the roll fails, that is all the player
needs to know; but if it succeeds, the GM should then show the
player the revised version of the spell and explain that the
character may try again when he or she attains a high enough
level to cast it. In this case, the GM may allow the character
to reduce either the time or the cost by half when the research
is attempted again at the higher level.

Magic Item Research

Any character who wishes to create magical items must know all
(if any) spells to be imbued in the item. Items that produce
effects not matching any known spell may require additional
research (to devise the unknown spell) if the GM so desires.

Some magic items require one or more special components that can
not usually be bought. Special components can only be used once
on such a project. For example, the GM might require the skin
of a displacer to create a cloak of displacement, or red dragon
saliva to create a wand of fireballs. Note that there are
specific rules for components under Other Magic Items, below.

Special component requirements are entirely at the option of the
Game Master, and are usually employed to slow the creation of
powerful magic items that might tend to unbalance the campaign.
It's also a good way to lead the spellcaster (and his party)
into dangerous adventures.

Chance of Success

Unless given differently below, the base chance of success
creating a magic item is 15% plus 5% per level of the
spellcaster, plus the spellcaster's full Intelligence (if a
Magic-User) or Wisdom (if a Cleric). Thus, a 9th level
spellcaster with a 15 Prime Requisite has a base chance of 75%.

Spell Scrolls

A spellcaster may create a scroll containing any spell he or she
has access to (for a Magic-User, spells in his or her spellbook;
for a Cleric, any spell the character might successfully pray
for). The cost is 500 gp per spell level, and the time required
is 1 day per spell level.

Reduce the chance of success based on the level of the spell
being inscribed, at a rate of -10% per level.

If the roll fails, the enchantment of the scroll has failed;
however, if the caster tries again to inscribe the same spell,
either the cost or the time is reduced by half (at the
character's option).

Other Single-Use Items

Scrolls (other than spell scrolls), potions, and a few other
items (such as the rod of cancellation) are single-use items.
These items may be created by Magic-Users or Clerics of the 7th
level or higher.

The chance of success is as given for scrolls, above, when the
item being created reproduces a known spell (or when the GM
decides a spell must be created, as described above). For other
types of items, the GM should assign a spell level as he or she
sees fit, and the cost and time required is doubled (making up
for the spell research or knowledge required for
spell-reproducing items). The time required is one week plus
one day per spell level (or equivalent), and the cost to
enchant the item is 50 gp per spell level, per day.

Potions are a special case; the character creating a potion may
create a large batch, consisting of several doses, which may be
bottled in separate vials or combined in a larger flask. For
each additional dose created at the same time, reduce the
chance of success by 5% and increase the time required by one
day. Note that increasing the time required will directly
increase the cost. If the roll to create the item fails, the
entire batch is spoiled.

Permanent Magic Items

Creating permanent magic items (rings, weapons, wands, staves,
and most miscellaneous magic items) requires a Magic-User or
Cleric of the 9th level or higher.

When enchanting an item with multiple abilities, each ability of
the item requires a separate roll for success; the first failed
roll ends the enchantment process. Such an item will still
perform the powers or effects already successfully enchanted
into it, but no further enchantment is possible.

Permanent magic items, including weapons (described in detail
below), must be created from high-quality items. The cost of
such items will generally be ten times the normal cost for such
an item.

Enchanting Weapons

The base cost of enchanting a weapon or armor is 1,000 gp per
point of bonus. For weapons with two bonuses, divide the larger
bonus in half (don't round) and add the smaller bonus; thus, a
sword +1, +3 vs. dragons would cost 2,500 gp to enchant.
Enchanting a weapon takes one week plus two days per point of
bonus; thus, the sword described would require twelve days to
enchant.

Reduce the chance of success by 10% times the bonus; so, a sword
+1 would reduce the base chance 10%, while the sword +1, +3 vs.
dragons described above would reduce the base chance 25%.
Further, the chance of success may be increased 25% by doubling
the cost and time required (this decision must be announced
before the roll is made).

For weapons having additional powers, combine the rules above
with the rules for creating permanent items. All enchantments
must be applied in a single enchantment “session.”

Other Magic Items

Magic items can have several features. Each feature added to a
magic item increases the cost and the time required, and
decreases the chance of success. The features are as follows:

Creates a spell or spell-like effect: This is the basic feature
of all non-weapon magic items. The base cost of this
enchantment is 500 gp per spell level; time required is five
days plus two days per level. If the magic item has multiple
spell or spell-like effects, add the cost and time figures
together. The chance of success is reduced 5% per spell level.

Has multiple charges: This includes, of course, wands and
staffs, but several other magic items would also have charges.
Each spell or spell-like effect normally has a separate pool of
charges (but see next). The table below shows the various
maximum charge levels and the associated cost, time and chance
adjustments:

Charge Level

Cost per Charge

Charges per Day

Chance

2-3

+150 gp

1

- 5%

4-7

+125 gp

2

- 10%

8-20

+100 gp

3

- 20%

21-30

+75 gp

4

- 30%

When using the table above, don't count the first charge for
cost or time purposes. Note that each separate pool of charges
in the item must be figured separately.

Item can be recharged: Figure the additional cost and time, and
the penalty to the chance of success, for rechargeable items as
being exactly twice the figures from the table above; so,
creating a rechargeable item with 3 charges costs 600 gp more
rather than 300 gp more, and takes two days per charge (or four
extra days); the chance of success is lowered 10% rather than
5%.

Item recharges itself: Creating a self-recharging item is
expensive; apply the following adjustments to the charge cost,
time and chance for items that recharge automatically. Note
that self-recharging items are never “rechargeable” in that
they may not be recharged other than by themselves.

Charging Rate

Cost

Time

Chance

1 per day

x 3

x 2

- 10%

All per day

x 5

x 3

- 30%

All per week

x 4

x 2

- 20%

Charges are generic: This means that all the effects of the item
draw power from the same pool of charges; most Magic-User staffs
are in this category. Items with generic charges are
automatically rechargeable; don't apply the normal adjustments
for this feature. Instead, combine the normal costs for the
charge pools of each effect (which must all have the same
number of charges), and then divide the charge cost, time and
chance adjustments by two. Thus, two effects sharing one pool
costs the same as a single effect with a single pool.

Item may be used by any class: By default, magic items may only
be used by the class that created them; so a wand of fireballs
is normally usable only by Magic-Users, or a staff of healing
only by Clerics. This feature allows the item to be used by any
class of character, and involves assigning simple command words
and gestures to the item. Adding this feature costs 1,000 gp
per effect. Note that all the item's effects do not have to be
covered; it is possible to create an item where some effects
may be used by any class, but other effects may only be used by
the creator's class.

Item operates continuously or automatically: This feature
supersedes both the charges and item use features. The item
works whenever properly worn, or activates automatically when
required. A ring of fire resistance is a good example; also,
the ring of invisibility is in this category. Adding this
feature multiplies the final cost and time figures by five and
applies a 40% penalty to the chance of success.

Each feature above applied to a magic item will require a
valuable, rare and/or magical material to support the
enchantment. For example, a wand of fireballs has a spell
effect that is powered by charges; these are two relatively
ordinary features, so the Magic-User creating the item proposes
a rare wood for the shaft and a 1,000 gp value ruby for the tip.
The GM may, of course, require something more rare or valuable
if the magic item is particularly powerful.

The base cost of a spell effect feature can be reduced by 25% by
applying limits to the ability. For example, a ring of charm
dryad is an example of limited charm person spell effect, which
would qualify for the deduction. This does not affect the chance
of success or the time required.

Weapons which are to be enchanted with additional powers other
than the normal bonus require combining the standard weapon
enchantment rules with the rules given above. Perform the
weapon enchantment first; if it is successful, then the
character enchanting the weapon must immediately (within two
days, as previously explained) begin the spell or spell-like
power enchantment process. Failure of the second procedure does
not spoil the weapon enchantment.

Cursed Items

Some cursed items, such as cursed scrolls, are created that way
specifically by the spellcaster. The difficulty of creating
such an item is roughly the same as the difficulty of creating
a spell scroll of bestow curse.

Other cursed magic items may be the result of a failed attempt
to create a useful item. The GM must decide whether or not a
failed research project will actually create a cursed item.

Creating a Dungeon Adventure

1. Think About Why

When creating a dungeon, the first question you must answer is:
Why will your player characters risk going into this dangerous
dungeon full of monsters and traps?

Here are some possible scenarios:

To Explore the Unknown: This is common in pulp fiction. One or
more of the player characters has heard of some ancient site,
and wishes to explore purely for knowledge. Possibly some of
the other player characters are involved for other reasons.

To Battle An Evil Incursion: Goblins are raiding farms in the
area, and the Baron has offered a reward for stopping the
raids; the player characters are happy to help.

To Rescue A Kidnapped Victim: Some friend of the player
characters has been kidnapped, and they must sneak into or
storm the villain's tower/cave/dungeon to rescue the victim.
Or, perhaps, the victim is the son or daughter of the local
Baron or a wealthy merchant who offers a reward for the safe
return of his or her offspring.

To Fulfill A Quest: The local church, to whom the player
characters owe a favor, would like an ancient relic recovered
from a lost mountain fortress, and the High Priest asks them to
look into it; or some similar task might be assigned, depending
on who the player characters owe a favor.

To Get Loot: This is a surprisingly common scenario (well,
perhaps not so surprising). The dungeon is rumored to contain a
hidden treasure of great value, and the first characters to find
it will be rich! Of course, the treasure might not be that huge,
and might be guarded by any number of horrific monsters…

To Escape Confinement: The player characters have been captured
by an enemy, and find themselves incarcerated without their
weapons, armor, or equipment. This scenario must be used with
care, as the GM must not be seen to be “railroading” the
characters into the adventure.

There are many other possible scenarios, and each has many
variations. Knowing the answer to this question will make the
next questions easier to answer.

2. What Kind Of Setting Is It?

Is the dungeon beneath a ruined fortress, or an ancient wizard's
tower? Or perhaps it's a natural cave, which has been expanded
by kobolds… or the tomb of an ancient barbarian warlord,
guarded by undead monsters… there are many possibilities.

3. Choose Special Monsters

Now you know why the player characters want to go there (or why
they will, when they learn of the dungeon), and you know what
sort of place it is. Next, decide what special monsters you
will place within. For instance, the natural cave expanded by
kobolds contains kobolds, obviously, while the warlord's tomb
contains some undead, zombies and skeletons perhaps.

4. Draw The Dungeon Map

Dungeon maps can be drawn on graph paper in pencil, or created
on the computer with any of a broad variety of dungeon-drawing
programs. When creating a dungeon for personal use, there is
certainly no good reason not to use pencil and paper. Below is
an example of a hand-drawn dungeon map, with the various
symbols noted:

[-- Image: graphics63 --]

5. Stock The Dungeon

“Stocking” the dungeon refers to assigning contents to each
room. There are several possibilities; a room might contain a
monster (which might or might not have treasure), a trap (which
might guard a treasure, or might not), an “unguarded” treasure,
a “special” (something other than a monster, trap, or treasure;
often a puzzle of some sort), or be “empty.”

The GM may choose the contents of any room, or may roll on the
table below:

d%

Contents

01-16

Empty

17-20

Unguarded Treasure

21-60

Monster

61-84

Monster with Treasure

85-88

Special

89-96

Trap

97-00

Trap with Treasure

An unguarded treasure will generally be hidden (such as in a
secret room, inside an unusual container, etc.) or protected by
a trap (a poison needle in the lock of a chest, or a poison gas
canister that explodes if the container is opened, or something
similar); such a treasure might even be hidden and trapped!
Again, some sort of saving throw should be allowed if a trap is
used. It's not a bad idea to hide a treasure so well that the
player characters are unlikely to find it; don't be concerned
if your players don't find it.

A monster might be selected by the GM or rolled on the random
encounter tables. It's traditional that the first level (below
ground) contains monsters of 1 hit die or less, the second
level contains monsters of around 2 hit dice, and so on, but
the GM may choose to arrange his or her dungeon in any way
desired.

A monster with treasure might indicate a lair, or it might be a
group of monsters carrying loot, possibly camping for some
reason before moving on.

A trap is, obviously, some sort of device intended to harm the
player characters, including such things as pendulum blades,
hidden pits, spear-chucking devices, and so forth. A trap with
treasure is such a trap protecting a treasure, which might be
in the room beyond the trap or actually within it (such as in a
pit). Some sort of saving throw should be allowed to avoid or
reduce the harm done by the trap.

A special might be a puzzle of some sort, such as a door that
can only be opened by a combination (hidden elsewhere in the
dungeon); or perhaps an oracle that answers questions about the
dungeon (but possibly it lies). The classic “magic fountain”
that randomly changes the ability scores of the drinker is
another possibility; if this is done, some sort of limit should
be imposed (such as, the device only affects a given creature
once, or the device causes harm more often than it gives aid)
to prevent abuse. In general, a “special” room is any room
containing something that either interests or obstructs the
player characters but is not a monster, trap, or unguarded
treasure.

Empty rooms contain no monsters, traps, unguarded treasures, or
specials. This does not mean that they are truly “empty;” a
room might contain a fireplace, upholstered chairs, side
tables, torch sconces, and curtains, and still be considered
empty. Hide a treasure in a secret drawer in a side table, and
it becomes an unguarded treasure room; in other words, to be
empty there has to be basically nothing of serious interest to
the player characters in the room.

6. Finishing Touches

The GM may wish to create one or more custom wandering monster
tables for the dungeon; monster patrols, if any, may need to be
described; and possibly some locations may have unusual sounds,
smells, graffiti, etc. which need to be noted. Don't spend too
much time on this, though.

Remember, if you only detail the “interesting” things, your
players will begin to guess what might be in a room. Some extra
description will help make things uncertain for the players. For
instance, a room with an unguarded treasure:

Game Master: This room contains a chest, centered against the
far wall.

Player 1: We look for monsters, and if we don't see any, the
thief will check the chest for traps.

Kind of obvious, right? This might be more interesting:

Game Master: In this room you see a comfortable-looking
upholstered chair, a side table and a foot stool. Two
burned-out torches are held by sconces on each wall.

Player 1: If we don't see any monsters, the thief will check the
table and the footstool for traps and see if anything is hidden
inside them, while the rest of us check for secret doors… one
of those sconces might open one.

A little extra detail can add a lot to the adventure.

Designing a Wilderness Adventure

1. Think About Why

This is much the same task as was described above. The player
characters may enter a particular area looking for a town to
resupply from, a church or temple to provide healing services,
or for many other reasons. Once in the area, the Game Master
can make the player characters aware of adventuring
opportunities in the area, by means of rumors, posted bounties
(such as for raiding humanoids), quests offered by local
clergy, and so forth.

2. What Kind Of Setting Is It?

Decide whether the area is deep in the wilderness, or in more
inhabited territories, what sort of climate will be found
there, how many towns, and of what size, are present, and so
on.

You may choose to design a new territory based on the goals of
the player characters in your campaign. For example, if the
player characters decide to seek their fortunes in the richest
city in the world, you could decide where this is and begin to
describe it by providing rumors of its wealth and splendor told
by far-wandering merchants. If these descriptions intrigue the
characters and they travel toward the city, you will have time
to decide what terrain – and dangers – lie in their path.

On the other hand, your setting should make sense, which will
help players make meaningful choices when traveling. For
example, areas under human control will be settled, with signs
of civilization such as cleared land for agriculture, roads,
strongholds, etc. Areas dominated by humanoid monsters, or
which are being raided by wandering humanoids, will be
battle-scarred and will not have food or other goods available.
A valley that was settled many years ago but abandoned after a
dragon attacked could contain ruined buildings, their walls
likely still bearing the marks of flame and claw, and fields
grown high with saplings.

3. Draw An Area Map

Now it's time to draw the area map. Some Game Masters prefer to
draw maps freehand, while others like to use hex or graph
paper; of course, programs are available to create maps on a
computer as well. It is a good idea to provide a scale for the
map, which can be whatever best fits the map and the area you
want to depict. A scale of 18 miles per square or hex is a good
choice for a large-scale map, as this is the distance that a
group of humans can cover in a day in clear terrain (see
Wilderness Movement Rates), which makes it easy to determine
travel times.

Rivers and coastline, hills and mountains, forests and plains
must be clear on the map. All of these areas should have an
appropriate climate: for example, the windward side of a
mountain range will usually receive a great deal of rain, while
the other side will be dry. You may choose to create an area
with abnormal weather for its location, such as a sandy desert
in the midst of a rain forest, but this should be unusual, a
tip to observant players that strange magic is involved.

Go ahead and place any interesting sites such as towns, ruins,
and significant monster lairs. Remember, in most cases your
party of adventurers will need some base of operations, be it a
city, town, village, or border fortress.

4. Detail Interesting Sites And People

Describe at least the base town, and the dungeon you expect the
party to visit first. Also detail any set or placed encounters
you laid out in the step above. There is lots of room for
creativity here: a distant, unfamiliar town may have different
laws, traditions, or currency. You should also describe key
NPCs and their connections to each other. NPCs have their own
goals and plans, which may or may not involve the PCs, and the
actions of player characters toward one person will often
influence how others treat them. Don't go overboard trying to
detail every single place on the map… leave some room for
expansion later, after you have a feel for your players and
their characters.

5. Create Encounter Tables

When designing a wilderness area, one touch that will really set
it apart is a custom encounter table. Choose those monsters that
seem most appropriate to the area, using the standard encounter
tables as a guide. If you have placed humanoid lairs or
encampments, you may wish to include their patrols on the
custom table.

Another alternative is to roll six or eight or ten random
encounters using the “generic” encounter table for the relevant
terrain type, and use that list as your random encounter table
for the area. When doing this, you probably should re-roll
duplicates.

Strongholds

Many player characters, upon reaching higher levels, choose to
settle down and build a stronghold. Generally this is allowed
when a character reaches 9th level or higher. The player
character must obtain land on which to build; in some lands,
frontier territory may be made available to any freeman (or
freewoman) who can tame it; in others, land may be available
for someone with enough gold; while in other cases the
character will need to petition the local Count, Duke or King
for a land grant.

Usually, Fighters build castles, Magic-Users build towers,
Clerics build temples and Thieves build guildhouses, but this
is not always so. Any character who builds a stronghold
suitable to his or her class will attract 1st level followers
of the same class as follows:

Class

Number of Followers

Fighter

3d6

Magic-User

1d8

Cleric

2d8

Thief

2d6

These followers will assist the character, but will not go on
adventures away from the stronghold in most cases (especially
dangerous dungeon adventures). They live from the income
generated by the stronghold. The primary sources of this income
are taxes on peasants for castles, fees for magical services and
students' tuition for towers, tithing from the faithful for
temples, and criminal activities for guildhouses. A stronghold
must have 200 square feet of living space for each follower, as
well as quarters for guests, stables for horses, and so on.

[-- Image: graphics3 --]A player who wants to build a stronghold
should draw its floor plan. Each story is usually 10' tall. The
construction costs for the stronghold are determined by the
square footage of its walls, floors and roofs, the materials
used, and the thickness of the walls.

Make sure not to double-count corners on walls that are 5' thick
or thicker – count the length of only one face. When determining
wall length for round walls and towers, approximate pi by 3,
since the inner face of the wall has a shorter circumference.
The table below gives costs in gp for each 10’ square section
of wall. The number by the material is its hardness, which is
deducted from damage to the wall.

Wall material

1' thick

5' thick

10' thick

15' thick

Maximum height

40'

60'

80'

100'

Wood (H 6)

10 gp

n/a

n/a

n/a

Brick (H 8)

20 gp

50 gp

n/a

n/a

Soft stone (H 12)

30 gp

70 gp

200 gp

n/a

Hard stone (H 16)

40 gp

90 gp

260 gp

350 gp

A 1' thick wall is made of solid pieces of material held with
mortar (or pegs and ropes for wooden walls); such walls may be
at most 40' tall. A 5' thick wall consists of two 1’ thick
walls sandwiching 3’ of earth and rubble; such a wall may be at
most 60' tall. A 10' thick wall consists of a 4’ thick outer
wall and a 2’ thick inner wall sandwiching 4’ of earth and
rubble, and may be built up to 80' tall. A 15' thick wall
consists of a 6’ thick outer wall and a 2’ thick inner wall
sandwiching 7’ of earth and rubble; these walls may be built up
to 100' tall. To attain the maximum height, thinner walls can be
used on upper stories. For example, an 80 ft. tower must have at
least 20’ of 10’ thick walls at the base, but more could be
used.

The character will have to pay engineering costs for designing
the stronghold, and tall structures are more difficult to
design and to build. For each portion of the stronghold (wall,
tower, and so on), each 10' of height adds 10% to the costs in
both time and money. The GM should feel free to add a
multiplier to reflect the difficulties of building in a remote
area, obtaining materials, etc. In particular, if materials
need to be transported, they require 1 ton of cargo space per 5
gp of wood or stone construction. (The increased weight of stone
compensates for its compactness compared to wood.)

A building over 40’ high must have a solid foundation, and if
over 60’ high, it must rest on bedrock.

A stronghold requires one worker-day of construction labor for
every gp it costs to build. Adding more workers reduces
construction time, but the time cannot be reduced below the
square root of the time for one worker to build the stronghold.
Assume that there are 140 working days per year (seven months of
20 working days each) in temperate climates.

Floors and thatched roofs cost as much and take as long to build
as it would take to build the square footage of their bases of
1’ thick wood walls. Wood-shingled roofs cost twice this
amount and take twice as long to build, while slate-shingled
roofs cost four times as much and take four times as long. (You
don't need to calculate the greater surface area of a pitched
roof, since the increased height increases construction costs
enough to cover this.)

These costs include normal features of construction such as
stairs, doors and windows. Interior walls are not included;
they are usually 1’ thick. Parapets, which provide cover for
defenders atop castle walls and towers, are usually 1' thick
and 5' high (so they are half-cost).

Note that guildhouses are almost always built in cities and thus
are usually built with 1’ thick exterior walls, but they cost
twice as much to build due to the traps and secret passageways
that are designed into them. A Magic-User's tower costs three
times as much to build, due to the need for ancient books,
alchemical equipment, and other supplies for conducting
research.

For example, Sir Percy, a 9th-level Fighter, desires to build a
60’ tall square keep (50’ walls with a 10’ peaked
slate-shingled roof) that is 50’ square. The keep will have
four stories and an attic, and the first story, which will
contain the great hall, will be 20’ high. Sir Percy wishes his
keep to be strongly built, so he tells his architect to build
with hard stone and use 10’ thick walls for the first two
stories and 5’ thick walls for the rest. The first and second
floors will thus be 30’ square or 900 square feet, and the
third and fourth floors will be 40’ square or 1,600 square
feet. With a total floor area of 5,000 square feet, Sir Percy’s
keep will house him and up to 24 other people (or animals such
as horses, which during an attack may be stabled in the great
hall!) in acceptable comfort. Its floor plans are shown on the
next page.

The first floor has 30 (= 5 [for 50’ length] x 2 [for 20’
height] x 4 walls, minus 8 sections double-counted at the
corners and 2 sections for the entrance) 10’ square sections of
10’ thick hard stone walls, which cost 7,800 gp, and 9 10’
square sections of floor, which cost 90 gp, for a total cost of
7,890 gp. The second floor is the same as the first, except that
the walls are 10’ high and there is no deduction for an
entrance, giving a cost of 4,250 gp. The third and fourth
floors each require 18 sections of 5’ thick hard stone walls,
costing 1,620 gp, and 16 sections of floor, costing 160 gp, for
a total of 1,780 gp per floor. The 50’ square roof costs 4 x 25
x 10 = 1,000 gp, and the 40' square attic floor adds 160 gp.
The design calls for a total of 770’ of 1’ thick interior walls
and doors, which would cost 30,800 gp if made of hard stone; Sir
Percy uses wood, which costs only 7,700 gp. These costs total
24,560 gp, but since the keep is 60’ high, its cost is
increased by 60% to 39,296 gp. The keep will require 39,296
worker-days. Sir Percy may employ up to 198 workers to build
the keep, in which case it will take 198 working days to build,
or a year and three months’ time. Keep in mind what might happen
in this time, given that the area is dangerous enough to warrant
building a castle.

Dungeons: A stronghold may also have a dungeon excavated under
it. A dungeon is an excellent place to store perishable
supplies, a good shelter if the castle is overrun, and often
incorporates an escape route if all is lost for the castle’s
defenders or a secret way out for raids is desired. Magic-Users
sometimes encourage monsters to take up residence in their
dungeons, as they provide a convenient source of supplies for
magical research and help keep away unwanted guests. Use the
following figures for skilled workers, such as dwarves or
goblins, to create dungeons; double the times for less skilled
miners.

Material

Time for one worker to excavate a 5’ cube

Earth

5 days (supports are required)

Soft stone

10 days

Hard stone

20 days

Structural strength and breaches: A section of stronghold wall
has as many hit points as its base cost in gp (for example, a
section of 10’ thick soft stone wall has 200 hit points). Stone
and brick walls only take damage from crushing blows, while wood
walls are also affected by fire and chopping attacks. If a given
section of wall loses all of its hit points, it is breached,
allowing attackers to pass through. If a breach occurs on a
lower course of wall, there is a 40% chance that the 10’
section above it will be breached by collapse, and a 20% chance
that the section below it will be breached. These secondary
breaches have the same chances of affecting the next 10’
section above or below them, and so on until the top or bottom
course of wall is reached. If a breach occurs on a right or
acute corner (90 degrees or less), the chances of breaches
double in each direction.

Attacking a Castle: Siege engines are difficult to aim, but as
castles don't dodge around, each successive shot by a given
siege engine with a given crew has an increasing chance of
hitting. To reflect this, the first attack on a castle's walls
is made against Armor Class 20; each subsequent attack by that
weapon, fired by that crew, at that same point in the wall, is
made against an Armor Class one lower than the previous shot,
to a minimum AC of 11.

Attacks on a castle's defenders are at -4 on the attack roll if
they are standing on the parapets, and at -10 if they are
behind arrow slits. Since characters defending the castle do
move around, the odds of hitting them with a siege engine do
not improve from shot to shot. There is an additional -2 on the
attack roll for missile attacks if the defenders are more than
20' higher than the attackers; this is not specifically due to
altitude, but rather because the defenders can use more of the
wall for cover. The defenders can take advantage of their
height by dropping objects on attackers near the castle's base;
these missiles do 2d10 points of damage, but they have a -2
attack penalty if dropped from a height of 30' or more.

Siege engines can damage several adjacent characters; roll
damage separately for each character in the 10' square hit by
the missile. Of course, the attack roll must be high enough to
damage each one; a roll of 19 against characters having Armor
Classes of 18 and 20 would hit the former but not the latter.

A castle may also be attacked by mining. This method of attack
involves tunneling under the castle wall, then setting fire to
the supports of the tunnel to cause the wall to collapse. It is
also slow, and if the castle has a moat, the tunnel must avoid
it, which requires that it be dug deeper, requiring twice the
time. A mine is dug like a dungeon, and once its supports are
fired, the wall above is breached; if the mine is only 5’ wide,
there is only a 50% chance of causing a breach.

Finally, a screw may be used to attack a stronghold. This
device, which costs 200 gp, is used to bore through castle
walls. A crew of at least eight is required to operate it. It
is only used at the base of a wall, and it is usually operated
under a sow, or portable roof, as it is slow. (A sow typically
costs about 100 gp.) The device does 1d8 points of damage per
turn, but it ignores hardness. A breach caused by a screw is
small, so it has only half the usual chance of spreading to the
next course of wall, unless widened by miners.

[-- Image: graphics11 --]

ALPHABETICAL INDEX

Ability Rolls  141

Ability score bonus  3

Adjusting Treasure Awards  118

Adventurers  137

Alchemist  40

Animal Trainer  40

Armor Class  4, 43, 46,

52, 54, 125

Armor and Shields  10

Armorer (or Weaponsmith)  40

Attack Bonus  46, 47, 54

Attack Bonus Table  47

Attacking a Vehicle  13, 52

Attacks  52, 54

Bandits  137

Beasts of Burden  11, 55

Becoming Lost  39

Beggar  136

Brawling  48

Brigands  137

Buccaneers and Pirates  137

Bully  136

Carrying Capacity  36

Character Abilities  4

Character Advancement  42

Character sheet  3

Charge  45

Charging  44, 45

Charisma  4, 5, 39, 40, 43

City Watch  136

City, Town or Village Encounters

135

Cleric  7, 15, 50, 122

Clerics vs. Undead Table  50

Climb Walls  9

Climbing and Diving  45

Combat  44

Combat round  36, 43

Combination Classes  6

Common  4

Constitution  3, 4, 5, 38,

44, 51, 53

Copper pieces  10

Cost of Weapons and Equipment

10

Creating An NPC Party  137

Damage  48, 52, 54

Darkvision  5, 37

Deafness and Blindness  52

Death Ray  45, 140

Death Ray or Poison  5, 6

Death and Dying  140

Defensive Movement  45

Demi-Human  3, 4, 46

Demi-Human Parties  138

Dexterity  4, 6, 8, 44, 45, 46

Doors  37

Doppleganger  136

Dragon Breath  5, 6

Dungeon Encounters  133

Dungeon Survival  37

Dungeons  37

Dwarves  5, 11, 37

Electrum piece  10

Elves  5, 11, 37, 43

Encounter  133, 134, 135

Encumbrance  36

Energy Drain  51

Engineer  40

Equipment  3, 10, 12

Evasion and Pursuit  45

Experience Points  3, 40, 42,

54, 141

Falling Damage  52

Fighter  7

Fighting withdrawal  46

Preparing Spells from Memory

141

GM    2

Game Master  2, 133

Game turns  36

Gems and Jewelry  120

Gold piece  10

Grenade-Like Missiles  47

Halflings  6, 11, 36

Healing  51

Hide  9

Highwaymen  137

Hit Dice  54

Hit points  3, 4, 5, 6, 37, 48,

51, 52, 54, 140

Holy Water  12, 49

Hopeless Characters  139

How to Attack  46

Humans  4, 6, 11

Individual Treasures  119

Initiative  4, 15, 43, 44, 45, 52

Intelligence  4, 5, 8, 37, 53, 141

Judging Wishes  140

Lair Treasures  119

Land Transportation  13

Languages  4

Light  36, 124

Listen  9

Lycanthrope, Wererat  136

Magic Armor  121, 125

Magic Item Generation  121

Magic Item Research  143

Magic Items  40, 54, 118,

124, 138

Magic Wands  5, 6

Magic Weapons  121, 124

Magic-User  8, 15, 16

Magical research  142

Maneuverability  44

Mapping  36

Melee Combat  46

Mercenaries  41, 136

Merchants  136, 137

Miscellaneous Magic Items

123, 129

Missile Fire  46

Missile Weapon Ranges  11

Missile Weapon Rate of Fire  47

Missiles that Miss  47

Money  10

Monster Attack Bonus  46

Monster Reactions  43

Morale  39, 49, 54

Move Silently  9

Movement  13, 36, 38,

39, 45, 54

Movement rate  13, 36, 54

NPCs  2

Negative Hit Points  141

No. Appearing  54

Nobles  136, 138

Non-player characters  2

Normal men  46

Oil    49

Open Locks  9

Optional Rules  140

Order of Play  43

Overland Travel  38

PC    2

Paralysis or Petrify  5, 6

Pick Pockets  9

Pilgrims  138

Placed Treasures  118

Platinum piece  10

Player character  2

Poison  53, 141

Potions  122, 125

Press Gangs  136

Priest  136

Prime Requisite  3, 7, 8

Race  3, 4

Raise Dead  140

Random Treasure Generation

118

Remove Traps  9

Repairing a Vehicle  52

Rest  51

Retainers  39

Rings  122, 127

Role-Playing  1, 153

Round  43, 44, 47

Running  44

Savant  40

Save As  54

Saving Throws  3, 5, 6, 52

Scrolls  122, 126, 127

Secret Doors  37

Set Weapon Against Charge  45

Shadow  136

Ship's Crew  40

Siege Engines  14

Silver piece  10

Sneak Attack  9

Specialists  40

Spell Research  142

Spells  5, 6, 7, 15, 16, 17

Starting money  3

Strength  4, 6, 7, 36,

37, 46, 48

Strongholds  149

Subduing Damage  48

Surprise  43

Thief  8, 37, 135, 136

Thief Abilities  142

Thieves' Picks and Tools  12

Time  36

Traps  37

Traveling by Air  39

Treasure  118

Treasure Type  54, 119

Turn  8

Turn the Undead  7, 50

Undead  7, 17, 49, 50, 51

Unguarded Treasures  120

Using the Dice  2

Vehicles  13

Wandering Monsters  133

Wands, Staves and Rods

123, 128

Water Transportation  13

Waterborne Travel  38

Weapon Size  11

Weapon and Armor Restrictions

139

Weapons  11

Wilderness Encounters  134

Wilderness Movement Rates  38

Wisdom  4, 7, 39

Wizard  136

Wrestling  48

XP    3, 40, 42, 54, 141

OPEN GAME LICENSE

INTRODUCTION

The Basic Fantasy Role-Playing Game (“BFRPG”) is based on the
System Reference Document v3.5 (“SRD”), which is Open Game
Content. Also, some monster descriptive text was taken from the
Castles and Crusades: Monsters Support Product (“MSP”), which is
also Open Game Content. The text of the Open Game License itself
is not Open Game Content. Instructions on using the License are
provided within the License itself.

Note regarding C&C Open Game Content used: The COPYRIGHT NOTICE
section below lists both the Castles & Crusades: Players
Handbook and the Castles & Crusades: Monster Support Document;
both are listed because we are required by law to do so, but be
advised that all Castles & Crusades materials used were taken
only from the latter document.

Designation of Open Game Content: The entire text as well as all
maps and floorplans incorporated in BFRPG (except the Open Game
License, as noted above, and the Product Identity License,
below) is Open Game Content, released under the Open Game
License, Version 1.0a (reproduced below) as described in
Section 1(d) of the License. Artwork (other than maps and
floorplans) incorporated in this document is not Open Game
Content, and remains the property of the copyright holder.

Designation of Product Identity: Product identity is not Open
Game Content. The following is designated as product identity
pursuant to OGL v1.0a(1)(e) and (7): (A) product and product
line names, including Basic Fantasy Role-Playing Game, Basic
Fantasy RPG, and BFRPG, as well as the phrase “make mine
Basic”; (B) all artwork, logos, symbols, graphic designs,
depictions, likenesses, formats, poses, concepts, themes and
graphic, photographic and other visual representations,
including the “eye” logo, which is the personal mark of Chris
Gonnerman for his various products, and which is Copyright ©
2002 Chris Gonnerman, and the “Scribbled Dragon,” which is
Copyright © 2005 Erik Wilson; (C) logos and trademarks,
including any trademark or registered trademark clearly
identified as product identity by the owner of the product
identity, and which specifically excludes the open game
content.

More information on the Open Game License can be found at:

http://www.wizards.com/d20

OPEN GAME LICENSE VERSION 1.0A

The following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
and is Copyright 2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc (“Wizards”). All
Rights Reserved.

1. Definitions: (a)“Contributors” means the copyright and/or
trademark owners who have contributed Open Game Content;
(b)“Derivative Material” means copyrighted material including
derivative works and translations (including into other computer
languages), potation, modification, correction, addition,
extension, upgrade, improvement, compilation, abridgment or
other form in which an existing work may be recast, transformed
or adapted; (c) “Distribute” means to reproduce, license, rent,
lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or otherwise
distribute; (d)“Open Game Content” means the game mechanic and
includes the methods, procedures, processes and routines to the
extent such content does not embody the Product Identity and is
an enhancement over the prior art and any additional content
clearly identified as Open Game Content by the Contributor, and
means any work covered by this License, including translations
and derivative works under copyright law, but specifically
excludes Product Identity. (e) “Product Identity” means product
and product line names, logos and identifying marks including
trade dress; artifacts; creatures characters; stories,
storylines, plots, thematic elements, dialogue, incidents,
language, artwork, symbols, designs, depictions, likenesses,
formats, poses, concepts, themes and graphic, photographic and
other visual or audio representations; names and descriptions
of characters, spells, enchantments, personalities, teams,
personas, likenesses and special abilities; places, locations,
environments, creatures, equipment, magical or supernatural
abilities or effects, logos, symbols, or graphic designs; and
any other trademark or registered trademark clearly identified
as Product identity by the owner of the Product Identity, and
which specifically excludes the Open Game Content; (f)
“Trademark” means the logos, names, mark, sign, motto,
designs that are used by a Contributor to identify itself or
its products or the associated products contributed to the Open
Game License by the Contributor (g) “Use”, “Used” or “Using”
means to use, Distribute, copy, edit, format, modify, translate
and otherwise create Derivative Material of Open Game Content.
(h) “You” or “Your” means the licensee in terms of this
agreement.

2. The License: This License applies to any Open Game Content
that contains a notice indicating that the Open Game Content
may only be Used under and in terms of this License. You must
affix such a notice to any Open Game Content that you Use. No
terms may be added to or subtracted from this License except as
described by the License itself. No other terms or conditions
may be applied to any Open Game Content distributed using this
License.

3.Offer and Acceptance: By Using the Open Game Content You
indicate Your acceptance of the terms of this License.

4. Grant and Consideration: In consideration for agreeing to use
this License, the Contributors grant You a perpetual, worldwide,
royalty-free, non-exclusive license with the exact terms of this
License to Use, the Open Game Content.

5.Representation of Authority to Contribute: If You are
contributing original material as Open Game Content, You
represent that Your Contributions are Your original creation
and/or You have sufficient rights to grant the rights conveyed
by this License.

6.Notice of License Copyright: You must update the COPYRIGHT
NOTICE portion of this License to include the exact text of the
COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any Open Game Content You are copying,
modifying or distributing, and You must add the title, the
copyright date, and the copyright holder's name to the
COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any original Open Game Content you
Distribute.

7. Use of Product Identity: You agree not to Use any Product
Identity, including as an indication as to compatibility,
except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement
with the owner of each element of that Product Identity. You
agree not to indicate compatibility or co-adaptability with any
Trademark or Registered Trademark in conjunction with a work
containing Open Game Content except as expressly licensed in
another, independent Agreement with the owner of such Trademark
or Registered Trademark. The use of any Product Identity in Open
Game Content does not constitute a challenge to the ownership of
that Product Identity. The owner of any Product Identity used in
Open Game Content shall retain all rights, title and interest in
and to that Product Identity.

8. Identification: If you distribute Open Game Content You must
clearly indicate which portions of the work that you are
distributing are Open Game Content.

9. Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may
publish updated versions of this License. You may use any
authorized version of this License to copy, modify and
distribute any Open Game Content originally distributed under
any version of this License.

10. Copy of this License: You MUST include a copy of this
License with every copy of the Open Game Content You
Distribute.

11. Use of Contributor Credits: You may not market or advertise
the Open Game Content using the name of any Contributor unless
You have written permission from the Contributor to do so.

12. Inability to Comply: If it is impossible for You to comply
with any of the terms of this License with respect to some or
all of the Open Game Content due to statute, judicial order, or
governmental regulation then You may not Use any Open Game
Material so affected.

13. Termination: This License will terminate automatically if
You fail to comply with all terms herein and fail to cure such
breach within 30 days of becoming aware of the breach. All
sublicenses shall survive the termination of this License.

14. Reformation: If any provision of this License is held to be
unenforceable, such provision shall be reformed only to the
extent necessary to make it enforceable.

15. COPYRIGHT NOTICE

Open Game License v 1.0 Copyright 2000, Wizards of the Coast,
Inc.

System Reference Document Copyright 2000-2003, Wizards of the
Coast, Inc.; Authors Jonathan Tweet, Monte Cook, Skip Williams,
Rich Baker, Andy Collins, David Noonan, Rich Redman, Bruce R.
Cordell, John D. Rateliff, Thomas Reid, James Wyatt, based on
original material by E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson.

Castles & Crusades: Players Handbook, Copyright 2004, Troll Lord
Games; Authors Davis Chenault and Mac Golden.

Castles & Crusades: Monsters Product Support, Copyright 2005,
Troll Lord Games.

Basic Fantasy Role-Playing Game Copyright © 2006-2008 Chris
Gonnerman.

BASIC FANTASY ROLE-PLAYING GAME

PRODUCT IDENTITY LICENSE

Subject to the terms of the Open Game License, above, you may
create derivative works based upon the Basic Fantasy RPG core
rules (this document). However, the Open Game License protects
the Product Identity (explained and detailed above) such that
you must have permission from the copyright holder before you
may use any of the listed Product Identity.

You may use certain items of the listed Product Identity under
the following conditions:

1. You must comply fully with the Open Game License, version
1.0a, as described above; and

2. The work may not be obscene in nature; in general, any work
containing subject matter that would qualify for an NC-17 movie
rating in the United States, or an R rating due to explicit
sexual content, is considered obscene for purposes of this
license.

If you comply with the above conditions, you may do either or
both of the following:

1. Include the text “Designed for use with the Basic Fantasy
Role-Playing Game” or “Designed for use with the Basic Fantasy
RPG”;

2. Use the “make mine Basic” logo, provided on the Basic Fantasy
Role-Playing Game website:

http://basicfantasy.org/logo.html

The logo may be resized as needed, but must not be distorted and
may not be altered other than to resize it.

If you wish to use other Product Identity from this work, you
must request and receive explicit permission from the copyright
holder.

In any of the above cases where the Basic Fantasy Role-Playing
Game Product Identity is used in your work, you must also
include the Basic Fantasy Role-Playing Game website address
“basicfantasy.org” in that work. You may place the website
address adjacent to the logo and/or name, or you may include it
on your title page, or place it in some other location where any
reasonably observant person would expect to find it.

END OF LICENSE

